# 秘密传统：神秘技术和自由能源 

10 The Secret Tradition Occult Technology and Free-Energy

".. .transporting systems, and the lighting of cities, and the operation of factories may someday be the outcome of...what I'd call mechanical witchcraft."

Charles Fort, Wild Talents, 1932

"The technology of the future will be magic. But magic is: technology with other means."

Eugen Georg, Verschollene Kulturen, 1930


There was some interrelationship between Keely and the academic sciences, but his entanglement with the occult communities of the time was considerable. There was already a strange technical dimension to the occult underground that was partly connected to the rapid scientific developments of the 19th century. This strange dimension helps to explain the immense success that The Coming Race enjoyed in the occult circles, for his novel struck a deep note of recognition.

These circles cherished the occult concept of the will of the magician, the adept, the initiated. With this will, the mind-force, and its proper application, anything would be possible. This concept was used by the early alchemists and Rosicrucians, by Mesmer and Von Reichenbach, and further developed by Bulwer-Lytton in The Coming Race. Deviating from this concept was the idea that Keely's devices were propelled by his very willpower, the waves of the brain, as set forth by Blavatsky, later Steiner and ultimately Fort.

It was the occult concept of the will that was an important ingredient of the occult technology that in that respect was a prophetic forerunner of today's cybernetics, virtual reality and most innovative science. For not all was pentagrams, old grimoires and the muttering of evocations when the stars were right.

That strange technological dimension is only mentioned in several studies of the occult, but never has been the subject of a study in itself.1 It is in this exclusive perception of reality that we encounter wonderful tales of homunculi and golems, of automatic people and artificial heads that communicate. There the skies are filled with the fabled vimanaas of the Great White Brotherhood. In this section of reality, the spiritist uses devices such as the Ouija board as a rudimentary interface, or the secluded environment of the Psychomanteion for dialogues with other-dimensional inhabitants.

It is also in this hazy area that the irrationalist whose mind is forever tuned to grandiose vistas of the universe discovers new rays, weird magnetism and strange powers. Through assiduous study the very foundations of cosmic forces and the laws of the universe are uncovered. It is in the darkest and most unexplored regions of the occult that the willpower of the initiate is linked to strange devices, to achieve a magical transformation of the universe itself, an aim that Rudolf Steiner hinted at discussing certain secret societies.

It is therefore quite possible that somewhere deep in the occult underground, Keely's work was continued after he died, his devices carefully hidden and his manuscript diligently studied precisely with this purpose in mind. Based on the existing documentation this is impossible to verify, let alone prove. We know that circles surrounding the Golden Dawn were very much aware of Astor's futuristic writings, of Bulwer-Lytton's novels, of Jules Verne's futuristic tales but also of such strange tales of fiction as Bradshaw's hollow earth novel The Goddess of Atvatabar. But whether or not the members of these orders were actually involved in the construction and use of a variety of techno-magical instruments that went beyond the traditional wand and other ritualistic appliances is now matter for conjecture. Contemporary studies make no mention of such endeavors, although, as we will see, there is documentation that in a number of instances several members of the Ordo Templi Orientis were actually either interested or involved in the construction and use of techno-magical devices.

Whether or not Steiner took precautions of not becoming more explicit about the nature of the secret circles that were engaged in the development of avant-garde technology, or simply dismissed the whole idea, is equally open to conjecture. Nowadays we only have Steiner's unsettling remarks.

However, what makes this possibility likely is that a strain of influence of Keely certainly is discernible in more than one instance. There was also a secret tradition that was nurtured by a number of occult orders, esoteric societies and lone individuals that possessed a deep interest for avant-garde scientific discoveries.

In the process, the philosophies of many of these occult orders would be mixed with futuristic concepts and alternative sciences, as would more generally accepted occult doctrine. There is also some documentation that mysterious devices were constructed, for many of which now only a rudimentary description, a rumor, a hint or a whisper remains.

A good example of this unique blend of occultism and strange science is the case of the German occultist and writer Ferdinand Maack (1861-1930), who founded a Rosicrucian order in Hamburg. In 1897, Maack devoted himself to the study of his newly discovered rays and his dynamosophic science. Maack also wrote lengthy essays that would be essential for a direction in magic that was called mathemagia, a blend of mathematics and magic that would center around the appliance of numbers for magical and ritual ends.

In the meantime, orthodox science drove the seekers of perpetual motion, the renegade scientists with their self-made jargon and the garage inventors who were hunting for free-energy into the arms of the occult world, and it was inevitable that the two would meet. Thus, the German Baron Von Reichenbach (1788-1869), who discovered what he termed the "odylic force," is today only mentioned in the occult textbooks. While experimenting, Von Reichenbach noticed that sensitive persons could perceive radiation that others could not see. Von Reichenbach termed these rays the cosmic Dynamid and named these after the Sanskrit word Od.

In the cases of Mesmer's animal magnetism and the findings of the pioneers of radiesthesia, one is now equally forced to turn to the history of the occult. The early history of free-energy is therefore also very much a part of the occult; in its pages are found various tales of forgotten 18th and 19th century free-energy inventors who, while themselves not directly related to occult doctrine, at least found a more welcome home there after their rejection by the orthodoxy. But long before the 18th and 19th centuries, rumors and legends of strange machines and unheard-of technologies surfaced from time to time in the occult communities.

The famous French magus Levi, for instance, records the story of Rabbi Jechiele, who was an adviser at the court of the French king Louis XI in the 13th century. Jechiele possessed a "brilliant lamp that lighted itself." "What one said about his lamp and its magical clue proves that he had discovered electricity, or at least that he knew how to make use of its principles; for this knowledge, as old as magic, was transmitted as one of the keys of the higher initiation," Levi explains.

Levi notes that the lamp had neither oil nor a wick, but those who went by his home at night would see "a brilliant star in Jechiele's house; the light was so bright, that one could not stare into it, and it projected rays in the colors of the rainbow." Another device, used to protect himself, emitted electric shocks: the rabbi "touched a nail driven into the wall of his study, and a crackling, bluish spark immediately leapt forth. Woe to anyone who touched the iron nail at that moment: he would bend double, scream as if he had been burned, after which he would run away as fast as he could."

Levi also mused on the tale of Jechiele's contemporary, alchemist and occultist Albertus Magnus (1193-1280): "At the same time lived Albert the Great, who was considered by the people to be the grand master of all magicians. The chroniclers assure that he possessed the secret of the Philosopher's Stone and that he had solved, after thirty years of labor, the problem of the android; that is to say that he constructed an artificial man, living, talking and answering all the questions with such a precision and subtlety, that Thomas Aquino, annoyed for it not keeping its silence, struck it on its head."



This iron man purportedly served Albertus Magnus for years, opening doors for guests, asking what they wanted and deciding whether or not they could see his master. Details about the appearance of this iron man or principles of operation lack completely, and the scarce bits that are available do not correspond to each other. Generally it is told that this remarkable automaton was made out of "wood, metal, wax and leather." At other instances Albertus Magnus is credited with the construction of only a head that could answer questions.

Another variation of this legend recounts that when Thomas Aquino destroyed the artificial being, Magnus cried: "Thomas, Thomas! Thirty years of labor thou hast destroyed with one stroke!"

There is some confusion, even among high occultists, about the meaning of this tale. Levi searches for a symbolical meaning on an initiatory level and warns that, "This is the popular fable; let us see what it means," after which he explains that, "The mystery of the creation of man and his first appearance on earth has always preoccupied the curious who searched for the secrets of nature.  The name Adam in
the Hebrew language signifies the red earth; what then is this red earth? It is what the alchemists search for, hence, the great work is not the transmutation of metals.  it is
the universal secret of life."

The earliest records, although made a long time after Albertus Magnus died, contain a clear coherence with astrology and with magic: the body parts of his android were constructed according to the position of the planets, the eyes for instance were constructed in accordance with a certain solar constellation, a curious fusion of the concepts of technology and the arcane. What must be taken into account was that Albertus Magnus, although today chiefly remembered as an occultist, was also one of the most important scientists of his day, a veritable homo universalis who mastered botanics, physics, astronomy and mechanics.

In Magnus' tale it is hinted that the legendary technology of building artificial people, or crude robotic beings had a much longer history attached to it. He wrote in De Anima Libri Tres: "It is said that Daedalus made a statue of Minerva out of wood that was moveable in all its limbs and, through the movement of the tongue, appeared to sing. This movement explained itself thus: in the inner of the statue were organs of mercury inserted and they appeared to move after the movement of the statue."7 Possibly this tale was a distortion of the very earliest oriental designs of a perpetuum mobile with hollow wooden stakes filled with mercury.

While much of this curious fusion of technology and occultism was lost or erased from the pages of history, it was said that the ever-elusive, mysterious Rosicrucians were the keepers of parts of this knowledge. It comes as no surprise, then, that Bloomfield-Moore wrote about Keely's vibratory force in connection with that mystical organization of the Rosicrucians, and reminded her readers that: " Everybody knows that a note struck upon an instrument will produce sound in a correspondingly attuned instrument in its vicinity. If connected with a tuning fork, it will produce a corresponding sound in the latter; and if connected with a thousand such tuning forks, it will make all the thousand sound, and produce a noise far greater than the original sound, without the latter becoming any weaker for it. Here then, is an augmentation or multiplication of power, as it has been called by the ancient Rosicrucians, while modern scientists have called it the law of induction. Modern science heretofore only knew the law of the conservation of energy; while to the scientist of the future the law of the augmentation of energy which was known to the Rosicrucians will be unveiled."

This was not the only secret to have been guarded by the Rosicrucians. It was also claimed that they possessed the secret of the "everburning lamps." These lamps were capable of burning for extremely long periods of time without a known means. Such a lamp was allegedly found, still burning inside a tomb dating back to Roman times as recently as the 1930s, during the construction of a road near Budapest.

Hargrave Jennings, the 19th century occultist who knew Randolph of the Hermetic Brotherhood of Luxor and who corresponded with Golden Dawn initiate Arthur Machen and Bulwer-Lytton, collected a number of tales about these legendary mysterious lamps: "...Rosicrucius, say his disciples, made use of this method to show the world that he had reinvented the ever-burning lamps of the ancients, though he was resolved no one should reap any advantage from the discovery." The tomb of Christian Rosencreutz, the mythical founding father of the Rosicrucian Order, was said to have been illumined by these everburning lamps.10 Naturally these tales would influence the direction that some writers took with their works of fiction. A perpetual lamp that is being fueled by carbonized diamonds was featured in a 1899 tale titled The Master of the Octopus.

Long before the invention of the telegraph, the telephone and other means of communication, it was believed that certain initiates had technical means to transmit messages over great distances. Allegedly Johan Trithemius (1462-1516)—who coincidentally is also credited with having the secret of the everburning lamps— described a device that resembles the current radio.12 In a book that is attributed to him, Albertus Magnus gives an elaborate and modern sounding description of a strange telegraph in a passage entitled, "The wonderful secret of how to build the sympathetic plate of numbers, with which one can communicate in an instant with distant friends." The telegraph consisted of two boxes made out of "fine steel," constructed "in the same manner as the cases for sea compasses" and having "the same weight, dimensions and appearance." These boxes had "reasonably big" surrounding rims on which were engraved the letters °f the alphabet. On the bottom of these boxes a small appendage was fixed on which some sort of needle was fastened. These needles were made out of a carefully selected magnetic stone. The legendary Rosicrucians are said to have built such devices.

Another means of communication, but with totally different beings, was provided by John Dee (1527-1608), the brilliant magus, mathematician, alleged Rosicrucian, astrologer royal to the court of Queen Elisabeth I, and some say spy. Dee constructed a complex device to communicate with what he termed "angelic beings." Influenced by Trithemius, Dee reasoned that intercourse with "spiritual creatures," was one of the highest ends that man could aim at. At this point, magic would enter Dee's life and work. The exactness of mathematics, together with the philosophies of the Hebrew cabbalah and the Arabic magico-alchemical works, formed the foundations on which Dee built his system of magic in a scientific manner.

In 1581, he began with the establishing of contacts with the "angelic beings." At first he relied to a certain extent on equipment, such as wax tablets, a skrying table, a gold lamen and several shewstones of obsidian and rock crystal. This eventually evolved into a sophisticated system which involved setting the skrying stone, of which several were used including a crystal ball and a black obsidian mirror, upon an elaborately engraved sigil called the "Sigillum Aemeth." This Sigillum Aemeth in turn was placed upon a special table that was inscribed with a hexagram, enclosed within a frame of Enochian letters, supporting seven specially designed talismans. The whole was insulated from the floor by a further four wax tablets, which were miniature versions of the Sigillum Aemeth.15 The results obtained through this method, and what would become Dee's legacy, was a strange language called the Enochian language which would be studied by countless esoteric and occult societies, among them the Golden Dawn.

Another striking example of strange, occult technology is found in a rare 18th century hermetico-alchemical book, which is worth a lengthy quotation. In it a friend of Benjamin Jesse (1642-1730) who was a cabalist and Rosicrucian from Hamburg, writes of the wonders that befell him while inspecting Jesse's workshop. Jesse died a year before, and the author states that he writes the account "so that one may imagine a bit what sort of physics of the ancients in the golden age will come to light."

The wonders were all to be found in Jesse's "prayer room in which never before a living human had entered or knocked on its door." This "prayer room" had a highly unusual safeguard to begin with: ".. .he took me to this prayer room and coated the joints and seams of the door with a translucent crystal substance, which he used as if it had been wax. After this he pressed his seal upon it, which was crafted out of gold, so that in this substance the seal of his signetring was imprinted, that immediately hardened, so that the seal would have been broken in two if the door would have been moved just slightly." The key to the prayer room was inserted in a little box that was treated with the same translucent crystal substance and his signetring. After Jesse did this, he threw his signetring in the crystal substance which then "dissolved like a piece of ice in hot water, and it fell to the bottom of the glass as a white powder, and the crystal substance colored red. After this he also melted the glass with the crystal substance and he gave me such a glass with the keys."

Jesse died, and as he requested, the writer gave the keys and the box to his relatives. With the help of the crystal substance, also termed "crystal water," the seals on the box melted away, the key to the prayer room was taken and the seal on the door of the prayer room was also melted. We now only have the detailed account of the writer of the strange devices that he saw in the room, which must have been extraordinary indeed: "In the middle of this prayer room a table of ebony stood, its plate was round, its rim coated with pure gold. For this table was a small chair for kneeling down. In the middle of this table stood an instrument of wonderful design. Its lower part, or the base, was round and made out of pure gold. Its middle part was made out of translucent, shining crystal, in which the everlasting fire was enclosed that emitted shining rays: its upper part was made out of pure gold and in the shape of a bowl. Immediately above this instrument hung a crystal on a gold chain, fashioned in the shape of an egg, so that the everlasting fire was enclosed if it emitted its rays. At the right side of this table I saw a golden box and a small spoon, in the box was a balm of reddish color. At the left of this table was a small chair made out of pure gold, on which a book lay with twelve pages, also made out of pure hammered gold which were so flexible, as if it were paper."

A bit of the reddish balm was placed in the bowl of the strange instrument on the table, and "immediately a pleasant smoke went up that refreshed the senses, and, what was even more miraculous, in its ascend the smoke touched the fire that hung over it in the crystal egg in such a way that it emitted terrible rays like the thunder and the stars."

The writer witnessed more strange wonders; they also found a "small box, made out of ebony but coated on the inside with pure gold. In it were twelve instruments made out of pure gold, wonderfully wound and crafted, around them engraved with symbols and letters. We went to the next box, which was larger. In it were twelve mirrors, not made out of glass, but out of an unknown substance, very neat and clean; in the center of these mirrors were odd symbols: their rims were fastened in golden frames.  Then we proceeded to a larger room; in it was a very large mirror that was
called 'Salomon's mirror' by Jesse and the wonder of the world, in which mirror he could join all images, every one of the entire world. Lastly I saw an ebony cabinet in which a globe was made out of a very odd substance. Jesse said that in it the fire and the soul of this world were also enclosed, and because of that it moved all by itself, in the same way as our world. I also saw, hanging above this cabinet, another cabinet. It was a cabinet with a special instrument, in the way as a timepiece, that had a roadmark or a pointer, but instead of the indications of the hours it had letters. Jesse said that this instrument moved in the same manner as the one he had in Switzerland  At that
time in that prayer room I witnessed incredibly wonderful things through the movements and the use of these wisdom instruments, things that I can impossibly write down, nor am I allowed to, but this I would like to share with you more I cannot do."

Obviously Bulwer-Lytton studied these strange accounts well or perhaps he drew upon his own experiences, as he describes similar strange techno-magical devices in his haunting tale The House and the Brain: ". our main discovery was in a kind of iron safe fixed to the wall.  In this safe were three shelves and two small drawers. Ranged
on the shelves were several small bottles of crystal, hermetically stopped. They contained colorless volatile essences, of what nature


I shall say no more than that they were not poisons—phosphor and ammonia entered into some of them. There were also some very curious glass tubes, and a small pointed rod of iron, with a large lump of rock-crystal, and another of amber also a lodestone of great power.  We found a very singular apparatus in the nicest order. Upon a small
thin book, or rather tablet, was placed a saucer of crystal; this saucer was filled with a clear liquid—on that liquid floated a kind of compass, with a needle shifting rapidly round, but instead of the usual points of a compass were seven strange characters, not unlike those used by astrologers to denote the planets. A very peculiar, but not strong nor displeasing odor came from this drawer."

Then there was the sidereal pendulum which hung in a glass encasing. With a conventional code, one obtained messages through the striking of the pendulum against the glass encasing. These sidereal pendulums were found all over Europe in the 18th century and as late as the 19th century.18 And indeed, in a letter to Edison, Olcott remarks that, "you told me that you were making some experiments with a pendulum, to test the dynamism of the will: since then I have seen many such tests successfully made."

Not only the original and in many aspects legendary Rosicrucians were allegedly involved in technological endeavors. These were to be found across the whole occult spectrum. One of the very first recorded instances, in which we find no occult influence at the surface, was the invention of Johan Ernest Elias Bessler (1680-1745). In Germany, he began to be known around 1712 as the constructor of various self-moving wheels. These he exhibited freely, but always with their mechanism concealed by casings forming part of the wheel and revolving with it. He exhibited his largest wheel at Hesse-Cassel in 1717. Gould writes that Orffyreus' wheel is "the only instance on record of a machine, capable of doing external work and yet apparently independent of any external or known source of power, having been exhibited in public and subjected to official tests."

While there is no occult influence at the surface, the way Bessler obtained his pseudonym gives food for thought. Bessler constructed his pseudonym "Orffyreus" by placing the letters of his name in a circle. By choosing the opposite letters he obtained his pseudonym. This not only brings the countless revolving wheels in Trithemius' book Polygraphia to mind, it could very well be that here we have an atrophied account of a device not dissimilar as Magnus' or Jesse's apparatus or one that Bulwer- Lytton described.

In a pamphlet written by Bessler and published in 1715, he gives an outline and principles of the machine, "but that explanation is at variance with all modern ideas of mechanics. If, as he claimed, he had discovered a new source of power, he was either unable or unwilling to give a correct description of it," remarks Gould. Bessler, or Orffyreus as he chose to name himself, destroyed his wheel in a fit of rage, without ever disclosing how it worked. When he died, he took the secret of his invention with him to dissolve forever in the mist of history.

In order to preserve another secret, towards the end of the 18th century, avant- garde science mingled for a while with freemasonry. Around 1780, Franz


Anton Mesmer (ca. 1734-1815), who was to become a source of inspiration for Bulwer-Lytton, swept Europe with his mesmerism. Mesmerism was a curious fusion of avant-garde science and occult preconception, and in the process Mesmer would coin the term "animal magnetism," which he saw as the soul of all that breathes, not unlike the ideas that Keely gravitated towards while describing the source of his discovered force more than a century later. Conveniently, at Mesmer's times French High-Grade masonry was at its peak, and it is sometimes alleged that it was freemasonry that introduced Mesmer in the better-situated Parisian circles.

Mesmer directed fluids by the movement of his hands and directed these through tubes and bathtubs or in a glass of water. By means of his animal magnetism he obtained strange results. It is said that people thus treated were often given to weep or to sleepwalk, and he cured many persons afflicted with fits of all kinds. No wonder then, that many freemasons were trying to obtain Mesmer's secret. However, it was established that only "sensitized" persons could procure the same results, and from this sprang the notion that an order was needed, to "sensitize" those persons.

Since Mesmer was a French High-Grade mason himself, a grade was established to promote and preserve the art and the secrets of animal magnetism. This little-known chapter in the complex history of freemasonry has become known as "magnetic masonry." The plan led to the founding of the Order of Universal Harmony in Paris in 1782. The purpose of these magnetic masons was also to create a healing center, which might radiate over the vast circle of initiates. For this, the initiates had to be ritually purified before they could conduct the process of magnetic healing themselves, somehow an occult forerunner of the process in which Keely had to teach certain persons to sensitize his equipment.

In 1784, lodges of this magnetic masonry were established in several French cities, including Versailles, Lyons, Bordeaux, Grenoble, Nancy and Marseilles. When the French revolution broke out in 1789, the order either dissolved or went underground. When Mesmer died, he died almost forgotten.24 His influence on freemasonry is to be found in a direction that is also called "Mesmerian Masonry," in which this spiritual current of the 18th century was connected to freemasonry.

Perhaps this Mesmerian current influenced a German group that is surrounded by mystery; the Free-Masonic Order of the Golden Centurion. This order supposedly was founded in Munich in 1840 by a number of rich German industrialists and well-to-do citizens26 and is described as "One of the most important, and certainly the most diabolically mysterious." Around the 1840s, this order used a strange device called the Tepaphone. But contrary to Mesmer's endeavors decades before, the Tepaphone was used for an infinitely more sinister purpose. Allegedly the Tepaphone was a "machine which, when coupled with the will of a magician, could kill anyone no matter were they were."

While various theories abounded upon its exact working, it was believed that the device could load or unload a person with the vital odic force. The Tepaphone was being described in one instance as made out of "multiple optic lenses and a copper spiral consisting of twenty-four coils in the center of which was a copper plate." An image of a person could be placed beneath the lenses and in the stream of electrical current that ran through the instrument. In this manner the person of the image would be affected positively or negatively. The spirals were tools for engaging the concentrated mental force of the operator or operators of the instrument, in order to guide its effects.

Of John Murray Spear (1804-1887), the American spiritualist preacher and founder of the forgotten "new motive power movement," it too can be said that he had one foot in the territories of the occult, while at the same time his restless mind created other wonders. Like Mesmer, it was to benefit mankind. In 1854 he constructed a motor at High Rock in Lynn in Massachusetts, which he called the New Motor. He intended it to be self-generative. The same year and across the ocean a strange book titled Der Organismus des Weltalls, or The Organism of the Universe, by German occult philosopher U. Milankowitsch was published.

In it he remarked that, "When I want to build a machine.. .that wants to move and that shall root in the earth, I at first think of that machine.  I design a blueprint. This blueprint, this idea originated in my mind, according to which. this machine should be built, and when this machine...is built, the idea that was located in my mind, proceeded in objective reality, is realized in nature, and has become one with. the machine. Thus the idea was the primal image, its form and law according to its rules...the machine is built. When we go from the workshop of the mechanic into nature, we will find an immense, boundless and endless building, the house of God, consisting of countless parts, or a moving, living, immense World Machine, consisting of a countless number of revolving and revolvable wheels. Now, the blueprint of this building of nature, this living World Machine, is the idea itself that is objectified and melted together with the same. The blueprint of the whole of this building of nature is therefore the primal idea, the absolute idea, the idea of ideas."

It is doubtful if, with his enigmatic statements, the German occultist somehow foresaw what Spear was constructing at the same time. It is equally doubtful if Spear read the philosophies of the German occultist and his musings on the nature of the World Machine, but it provides a partial insight into the motives of a priest and spiritualist to construct a curious machine-like device. It also reflects the exalted spirit of the times, as experienced by the esoterically inclined.

Spear, much like Newbrough—who was also a spiritualist—claimed that he did so at the instigation of one of the groups of spirits by whom he was controlled. He had been active in the antislavery, peace and temperance movements, and became a medium in March, 1852. He claimed that his book Messages from the Superior State was dictated by the spirit of John Murray, the founder of the sect of Universalism. Whatever its causes or literary origins, it heralded his first public appearance as a medium. Spear was also in the habit of journeying all over the country as the spirit moved him, "at the command or direction of spirits to whom he professed himself willing a childlike and unquestioning obedience."



A year later, Spear confided to a Boston newspaper that his spirits made "important declarations" to him as he visited Niagara Falls. Forty years later, this place would see a very different kind of magic, but this time in the form of one of Tesla's visionary ideas. Spear's spirits declared that they had formed various associations. One of these was the "Association of Electricizers."

Before the construction of his New Motor that led to a whole movement, "the new motive power movement," Spear experimented with mineral and vital electricity as a means of developing the latent powers of mediumship. He also sought to promote the influence and control of spirits through the aid of copper and zinc batteries, "so arranged about the person as to form an armor, from which he expected the most phenomenal results." However, an experiment tried in St. Louis "proved, so far as external effects were concerned, a complete failure."

In the fashion of Levi's symbolical explanations and of Albertus Magnus' construction of an android, Spear too had other things on his mind; he "had long indulged the idea of embodying in some tangible form the crude conceptions of certain minds (not limited to the earth spheres alone), who have labored to discover and scientifically control the mystery of the life principle." Eventually Spear and his array of invisible spirit counselors thought that they had made this discovery, and a Boston spiritual periodical, the New Era, declared that "the association of Electricizers in the spheres were preparing to reveal to mankind a 'new motive power,' God's last, best gift to man," a work that was "destined to revolutionize the whole world" and "infuse new life and vitality into all things, animate and inanimate." From time to time, the Boston periodical would drop mysterious hints concerning Spear's discovery, which was "to awaken the world to wonder," but finally it announced in its pages that "high spiritual intelligences, through the organism of Mr. John M. Spear, had given directions for the construction of a living machine," termed "a new motor."

Consequently, strange reports began to circulate in spiritualist circles. In one of these, a Boston woman, also a spiritualist, was named as "the mother of the new motor," and "absurd and impossible stories were bruited about concerning the practices by which 'the life principle' had been infused into its organism."

Nevertheless, the New Era soon printed an article headlined, "The New Motive Power, or Electrical Motor, otherwise called 'Perpetual Motion'—The Great Spiritual Revelation of the Age." In it, its editor who was Spear's friend but not a spiritualist himself, proudly announced that "after about nine months of almost incessant labor, oftentimes under the greatest difficulties, we are prepared to announce to the world, first that spirits have revealed a wholly new motive power to take the place of all other motive powers. And second, that this revelation has been embodied in a model machine by human cooperation with the powers above." The last statement was the vague utterance that the results thus far obtained, were "satisfactory to its warmest friends."

Spear's "electric motor" or "The New Motor" was designed to "correspond to the human organism," it had "a brain, heart, lungs etc.," and it should "perform the functions of a living being." The queer device also had "some little balls, connected with the machine," which "for some months have given evidence of motion." The device also was equipped with a large wheel, the "grand revolver," upon which "all the executive power is made dependent." Wiring of some sort covered the apparatus, "Each wire is precious, sacred, as a spiritual verse. Each plate of zinc and copper is clothed with symbolized meanings, corresponding throughout with the principles and parts involved in the living human organism  The various parts of this mechanism, both the wood work and the metallic, are extremely accurate, and so mathematically arranged with reference to some ulterior result or effect." Poles and magnets were also arranged in a specific way in the device.

The statements of the famous spiritualist Andrew Jackson Davis - who went to investigate Spear's remarkable machine, which he described as a "peculiar construction" - give some insight in the proposed working of Spear's New Motor: "The philosophy given through Mr. Spear, upon which the mechanism is predicated, is this: First, that there is a universal electricity. Second, that this electricity has never been naturally incorporated with mineral and other forms of matter. Third, that the human organism is the most superior, natural, efficient type of mechanism known on the earth. Fourth, that all merely scientific developments of electricity as a motive power are superficial, and therefore useless or impracticable. Fifth, that the construction of a mechanism on the laws of man's material physiology, and fed by atmospheric electricity obtained by absorption and condensation, and not by friction or galvanic action, will constitute a new revelation of scientific and spiritual truths, because the plan is wholly dissimilar to every human use of electricity."

The New Machine was to derive its motive power from the magnetic store of nature, of creation itself that was defined by Milankowitsch as an incredible World Machine. Since Spear's New Motor derived its power in such a way, it was to be as independent of artificial sources of energy as was the human body.

When a woman, obeying a vision that she had, went to the High Rock at Lynn where the New Motor was displayed, she suffered "birth-pangs" for two hours. From this possibly epileptic seizure, she judged that the essence of her spiritual being was imparted to the machine. At the end of that time, it was averred that "pulsations" were apparent in the motor.

The New Machine failed to work, or at least its actions remained inconclusive and unsatisfactory, and even his fellow spiritualists didn't think much of the device. Eventually the machine was brought to the village of Randolph in Massachusetts and housed in a "temporary building." There the New Machine, costing Spear nearly
$2,000 to construct, was destroyed by a mob of superstitious villagers. Saddened, Spear, who wanted to give mankind "God's last and best gift," disappeared from the pages of history, except for an occasional reference.

What it demonstrates, aside from the superficial similarities between Spear's New Motor and Keely's disintegrator, is the fact that Spear's case was the reason that certain spiritualists were interested in Keely's discoveries in the first place.

Spear's story, strange and intriguing as it may be, was not an entirely isolated


one. In 1850, just a few years before Spear was visited, young farmer Jonathan Koons, who lived on an isolated farm in Milfield Township in Athens County, Ohio, had his encounter with spirits. His neighbor, John Tippie, also lived on a farm some two or three miles away. On the farms of each they erected a log cabin, consisting of a single room about 15 by 12 feet. The buildings were built by Koons and Tippie under the direction of "what claimed to be the spirits of human beings," as "circle rooms, and fitted up with instruments, etc., from written plans and diagrams drawn out by the spirits with their own hands."

In each room was a "spirit machine," and although there is no definitive time period in which young Koons and Tippie were engaged in their construction, they were probably built around the time that Spear was busily assembling his New Motor. The spirit machines consisted of "a somewhat complex arrangement of zinc and copper," with "two drums...fastened with copper wires upon wooden supporters" at the top of a table. The table was intersected with copper wires wrapped with zinc. "On the upper cross wire hang some copper plates, cut in the form of doves, to which are suspended a number of bells, which the spirits sometimes ring." The spirits alleged that the spirit machines served the purpose of collecting and focalizing the magnetic aura used in the manifestations, also described as the "collecting and retaining the electricity of the circle and it is charged before giving any demonstrations, at every sitting." The charging of the singular devices was accompanied by a "startling noise." The devices, also described as "novel batteries" were placed upon a long wooden table, by the side of which lay several music instruments, provided "according to direction."

Visitors witnessed strange doings; "spirits" would play the musical instruments, loud blockings were heard and sometimes the log cabins shaked on their foundations. These spirits identified themselves as "of the most ancient and primal order of man." They spoke of the biblical Adam as of a "comparatively modern date," and indicated that they were "by no means the first of earth's inhabitants," though antedating the biblical Adam by "thousands of years."

In the year that Spear had his revelation at Niagara Falls that would lead to the construction of his New Motor, Koons entrusted to paper a religious philosophy given to him by his visiting spirits. He wrote that the spirits declared that, "the electric element forms the various paths in which planets and all other known bodies in space travel and move in their respective orbits, but that nothing...can penetrate the realms of the 'subtler fluid,' yet it divides and permeates all space, and seems to hold in control the infinite realms of the electric element.  There is a grand central territory in the universe  It embraces illimitable though unknown realms; yet its position as a vast central point is defined, from the fact that from thence, and to thence, seem to tend all the illimitable lines of attraction, gravitation and force, which connect terrestrial bodies, and link together firmaments teeming with lives and systems."

Koons' spirits even imparted to him a philosophy regarding the working of their spirit machines. From it, we learn that one of its purposes was to overcome gravity. This detail alone may very well class Koons' and Tippie's spirit machines as two of the very first recorded instances of antigravity devices that were actually built with that purpose in mind.

"It is said that spirits, in their communion with earth, manifest through two primitive elements; first, an electro-magnetic element of which the spiritual body is composed; next, a physical aura, which emanates from the medium, or can be collected from material substances, analogous, it is supposed, to the element of 'vitality.'
...From the combinations of these two, namely the emanations of the spirit and the medium, a third or composite is formed, which is affected by the atmosphere and human emanations. From the preponderance of the electro-magnetic or spiritual element, the laws of cohesion and gravitation can be overcome, and through this spirits are enabled to dissolve and recompose substances with great rapidity, heave up and carry material bodies through the air, and causing them to float or sink in proportion to the strength of the battery formed."

Thus, visitors of those strange log cabins would witness the musical instruments floating in the air, suspended from gravity while a horn, "a tin trumpet of two feet long," would produce "speaking, whistling, singing and addresses." Each time it would rise into the air, produce the sounds after which it would "fall to the table." The phenomena seemed to begin each time with "tremendous blows on the table, ceiling and walls."

In 1854, Koons' and Tippie's log cabins were still shaking "like a tree in a gale of wind," the spirits exhibiting "extraordinary pyrotechnics, seemingly to consist of luminous bodies flying about with the swiftness of insects." Koons would pick up a violin and drew a bow across it; "immediately" another violin was sounded. Tippie's cabin also exhibited the same phenomena; although persons there "neither saw writing nor a spirit hand." The music in Tippie's cabin, however, was "all produced by spirits," and was "more varied and interesting than Koon's."

Numerous people visited the strange cabins where gravity seemed to exist no more. Affidavits were signed. The cabins were searched, but nothing of a fraudulant nature was found. Not all was well though; Koons' and Tippie's houses were attacked by mobs, their barns and crops destroyed by fire, "their children set upon and ill-treated." The phenomena seemed to have waned in later years and would ultimately come to a complete standstill; it was suggested that the reason for this was that Koons and Tippie lost their mediumistic gifts: "it must be remembered that...the presence of a large family of highly mediumistic children and the electrical nature of the locality where the circles were held must be taken into account."45 Koons and Tippie split up, and the ultimate fates of those wonderful spirit machines which according to witnesses were able to suspend gravity, is unknown.

Emma Hardinge, in her time a well-known medium and one of the founding members of the Theosophical Society, and of whom we are indebted to for the previous passages about Spear, Koons and Tippie, cites an instance in which we traverse the boundaries of the actual and historical. In a strange book published under her auspices, the anonymous narrator of the allegedly autobiographical


sketches received an initiation into the mysterious Ellora Brotherhood while in India. The subterranean temple of Ellora—which indeed very much exists— where the initiation took place was in fact a strange device of gargantuan dimensions: "The whole temple was furnished with fine metallic lines, every one of which converged to six powerful galvanic batteries attached to the silver thrones by six of the adepts. These persons, adepts in the loftiest sense and most significant sense of the term, received their inspiration from the occupant of the seventh throne, a being who, though always present, was not always visible."

Through the electrical system of this elaborate battery, the positive pole being the seven hierophants, and the negative being the assembly of neophytes, the narrator was mentally impressed with fantastic images of cosmic events,47 much like the visions of Koons and Newbrough's Oasphe.

In 1873 in Paris, Eliphas Levi, the great French magus and friend of Bulwer- Lytton, was quite happy to stumble upon the metal parts of a device called the Prognometer in a junk shop. The proprietor bought the dismantled device at an auction of the collector of handwritings and curios, Valette, who was executed during the revolt of the Parisian Commune. The proprietor paid 500 francs for it, but he sold the device to Levi for one fifth of the original price.

The Prognometer, built by the Polish mathematician Hoene-Wronski, was a mechanical device that could predict certain trends in the future history of mankind, or so it was claimed. "While the master lived, the disciple had not been allowed to see the Prognometer. Now he bought it, recognizing Wronski's writing in the mathematical symbols which covered the contrivance," writes Webb.49 "Wronski trusted his secret only to Marquis Sarrazin de Montferrier, whose son-in-law was the last grandmaster of the Templars. I heard about this secret wonder, that Wronski had guarded as jealously as Menelaous had Helena, but I had some doubt as to the reality of its existence. Besides, I knew that before Wronski died, he had dismantled all his machines and had sold the copper to people from the region of Auvergne," explained Levi,50 and once again, as in the case of Mesmer, we see an order of definite esoteric and secretive nature involved in the preservation of occult technology.

Joseph Maria Hoene-Wronski (1776-1853) was a remarkable man, and it is with him that the revival of 19th century occultism on the continent indirectly begins. It was Wronski who initiated Levi between 1850 and 1853, who then became known as the sole instrument of the 19th century revival of the occult sciences. After a career that had led Wronski from the Polish rebellion of 1794 in the Russian army which he left with the rank of major in 1797, he studied philosophy in Germany, enlisted once again in the Polish army, and worked in 1810 in the Observatory of Marseilles. Around this year, Wronski had his illumination, and as a consequence, he claimed to have discovered the Absolute. The Absolute is the knowledge of truth, which may be reached through the human reason. While Wronski claimed that this was achieved through rational thought, it nevertheless is almost impossible to understand him, since he wrote his theories down in dense, mathematical terms. Another important theory of Wronski was that man could create reality from the total of the impressions of his senses.

Brilliant as Wronski may have been, he was not able to communicate or depart with his ideas, which were steeped in occult lore. Of this, Webb writes that "Wronski was knowledgeable in Cabalistical matters as was obvious to early commentators on his work. He also knew Boehme and was familiar with Gnostic teachings  Wronski
maintained that the goal of man was to become god-like; like other occultists, he veiled his meaning with an impenetrable curtain of jargon. His teachings were not for the vulgar but only for those who would make the effort to penetrate his mathematics."

The further career of Wronski has some resemblances with that of Keely, although Wronski had a much, much more poverty-stricken existence. As in Keely's life, Wronski's only child died young. As with Keely, business teamed up with intellect, but to no effect. In Wronski's case, this came in the form of a French businessman, Pierre Arson. He met Wronski in 1812 and proceeded to take a course of instruction from him. He also agreed to subsidize the publication of Wronski's oeuvre. Around 1831, however, the two fell apart; Arson seems to have been disappointed in the final revelation of the Absolute, and so he not only revoked his agreement, but also published a hostile broadside.

Wronski replied and soon the two would find themselves in court. Curiously, Arson never ceased to regard Wronski as a genius. Another never properly explained matter was the fact that during their mutual recriminations in pamphlet form, Arson attracted the attention of a secret society about whom he never was certain whether they were in league with or against Wronski.

There are speculations as to the identity of this secret society; while Webb thinks it likely that it involved a revived group of French Martinists, another suggestion is that it was one of the Saturnian Brotherhoods, said to have been revived in Warsaw by Wronski, with outer courts in Krakow, Poison and Thorn, although these lodges were ultimately destroyed by various wars.

The occultist-mathematician kept turning his mind on things technical; in 1833, he developed a system for steam locomotives which he called a Dynamo-genic System that allowed the engine to dispense with rails. Wronski also invented a tracked vehicle, and the contract that he signed in 1833 with the Messageries Generates de France probably was for its prototype. He should have been able to live comfortably from the monies given to him by the company; yet when he perceived further mechanical principles from his invention, and he decided that it was his duty to publish these, the company withdrew all support. The remaining years of his life were spent in absolute poverty, his only feat being Levi's initiation in the last three years of Wronski's life.

It is through Levi, that a description of Wronski's Prognometer has survived at all, and Levi hints that this was not the only device that he built: Wronski "dared to involve himself with inventions, he constructed mathematical machines, revolving axes which were put together in an admirable fashion.  Only his machines would not work because the copper and bronze of his devices would not acknowledge the truth of his philosophies.  His most fevered and most kept secret
investigation was the invention of a divinating machine, also called prognoscope, that calculated all probabilities and drafted equations of occurrence that had happened in the past, happened now and would happen in the future, in order to establish all possible values."

One day Wronski found out how to do this, and "he asked workmen to come over and ordered them to the most extreme secrecy. Nobody saw the design of his machine, but he let the workmen construct the machine in bits and pieces, and being a bit of a mechanic, put the parts together himself. All was immensely complicated but as harmonious as the universe itself. The construction of the Prognometer cost enormous amounts of money."

It consisted of two globes riveted together, which, by two crossing axles, turned in a large immovable circle. Two small pyramids which alternately opened and closed themselves contained the principles of all the sciences. The summary of all these sciences was engraved, corresponding to their analogies, on the two globes that revolved around the two axles. According to Levi, the machine resembled the heavenly globe, covered with polished bismuth, mounted on a carriage of gilded copper.

"There were two smaller globes on the top of which were mounted two three- sided pyramids. One symbolized godly knowledge, while the other symbolized human knowledge. These always revolved contrary to each other, so that the harmony was the result of the analogy of its counter parts," Levi writes.

One of the small globes, the one that symbolized godly knowledge, was also called "a polarisator" and it was adorned with a lightning flash and a polished compass. Around this globe four letters, A, B, X and Z, were fixed, corresponding with its Hebraic equivalents, that had the value of "other Hebraic letters." From this globe two branches pointed, both having small compasses that indicated the proportion of "what was above and what was below." The other globe, representing human knowledge, carried "the flamboyant star of the magus," which Levi also calls "the sign of Salomo." This sign was viewable from "two sides," and the flash of lightning, pointing towards the globe, terminated in a five-pointed star, symbolizing "human initiative and human autonomy." On the circle were the signs of the zodiac and apertures which "opened and closed at will." On the ports of these apertures, the names of the sciences were written; under the ports, Wronski wrote the names of the "fundamental axiomata." There were 32 ports, on each of which were written "the names of three sciences." "The axiomatas were engraved with the greatest precision, but with a handwriting so small that even with a magnifying glass these were hardly discernible," Levi writes.

On the inside of the big globe, which was part dark and part light, Wronski wrote equations of the comparative sciences, and on the big motionless circle he wrote the fundamental principles. "All sciences are the degrees of a circle revolving around the same axle," and elsewhere stood, "The future is contained in the past but is not wholly contained in the present," and "the rays of the


Prognometer represent the summary of all knowledge." When Levi touched one of its parts, "the globe made out of bismuth opened itself and revealed on the inside another globe that was also covered with mathematical equations."

It is not known what happened to Wronski's Prognometer upon Levi's death two years after he found the device. Except for one etching, no picture of the Prognometer exists. It was Wonski's Prognometer, the "extraordinary calculating machine" that is considered a possible inspiration for another strange device, invented by French occultist Saint-Yves d'Alveydre (1842-1909). His fame in occult circles is derived mainly from his book Mission de l'inde en Europe, in which the 19th century esoterists learned more about the subterranean realm of Agarttha. But Saint-Yves d'Alveydre did not consider this or his other esoteric books to be his greatest works, nor his ideas on the use of seaweed as a means of nurture. In the last period of his life Saint-Yves d'Alveydre was totally devoted to his great invention which he called the Archeometer. He even obtained a patent, no.333.393, dated June 26, 1903, for this invention.

The Archeometer was a grandiose machine, which "translated into the material the word, form, color, smell, sound and taste," it was the "key to all religions and all the sciences of antiquity," and consisted of a disc or discs of colored cardboard with some very complex diagrammatic arrangements.

In the pamphlet Archeometre. Brevet d 'invention no 333.393 that was printed in 1903," Saint-Yves d'Alveydre wrote in eight pages everything that he wanted the public to know about his mysterious device. From this we learn more about the design of his Archeometer. The disc was divided in concentric zones. These zones or divisions contained the correspondences that existed between numbers, letters, colors and musical notes, the signs of the zodiac and of the planets.

On it was also found the invaluable alphabet of Watan that, according to Saint- Yves, had been used by the Atlantean race. These letters were held of the utmost importance since through these one could rediscover the elements of the symbolic and figurative signs developed in antiquity and the meaning of which had been lost since time immemorial. Also included in the Archeometer was a metric system, destined to reform sonometry, that could be used in the determination of the proportions of all the graphical constructions.

While it is suggested that Wronski's Prognometer was perhaps the inspiration of the Archeometer, Saint-Yves could equally have been inspired by Keely's musical charts. Upon examination, one is stricken with the uncanny resemblance that Keely's charts have with the discs of Saint-Yves Archeometer.

Saint-Yves was probably influenced by Keely's proposition to show the various colors of sound on a disc, each note having its color in order to demonstrate that the same laws which develop musical harmonies develop the universe. After all, when Saint-Yves invented his Archeometer, the Prognometer was already half a century old and perhaps a legend for 30 years.

Saint-Yves terminology as exemplified in the parlance of the "red race" points towards Theosophical influences, which are also clearly visible in his esoteric oeuvre. And theosophy was the largest and most easy accessible channel through which Keely became known in the occult communities of the 19th and early 20th centuries in America, England, Holland, and in France.

When Keely began to receive attention from the press and the general public, several other inventors came forth to tell of their inventions, and news of their activities reached the surface. Often these stories are irritatingly vague. Inventors sometimes visited Keely and it is from this that we very briefly learn of their existence, but unfortunately nothing of their inventions. When he was in jail, a young inventor who had "been waiting for eight years for a patent from Washington," tried to see him, without success. Mr. Browne, an inventor from Brooklyn, visited Keely in his laboratory and claimed that "He could do all that Keely could do. " Dr. Dupuy of New York was "for years experimenting in this field without meeting with Keely's progressive successes," and there was of course Kinraide, who experimented in his fully equipped cave with magnetic needles.

Sometimes, more information is available and tantalizing glimpses on the inventions themselves are given. In 1875, A. Arnold confided to a newspaper that he had "received by mail from an unknown source a pamphlet entitled 'The Keely Motor.'73 The first paragraph of this pamphlet is a quotation from a paper published by me some two years ago, in a New York scientific journal. I know nothing of the Keely motor nor any of the persons connected with it. But for the benefit of the public I will say that I have in practical operation, capable of doing useful work, a simple apparatus which generates a constant pressure of fifteen pounds per square inch, without heat, chemical or electrical action, or the employment of any other materials than a small quantity of air and water. I use this low pressure only for convenience, but can at pleasure increase it indefinitely in the same apparatus. I can assure the public that producing a pressure only limited by the strength of a generator, from no other source of power than a small quantity of cold water, air moving slowly therein, is no 'humbug,' nor new discovery, but is a fact, long shown to scientists and mathematicians. And, furthermore, the apparatus I have for effecting it cannot be patented by other parties. Respectfully yours, A. Arnold. Tenafly, N.J., July 4, 1875."

Two weeks later, a notice appeared in a newspaper of a new motor in operation in Hamilton, Ontario that was said to rival the Keely motor. "The motive power consists of nine parts of air and one of coal-gas, which operates as an explosive. The inventor challenges the Keely motor to a trial." Although there was considerable interest in such inventions, as is clearly demonstrated by all the publicity that surrounded Keely, nothing more was heard of these inventors.

Four years later in 1879, a Chinese sub-prefect, Tung Yu-ch'i, claimed to have invented "a machine which would go of its own accord and generate sufficient power to propel a steamer of the largest size." The enterprising sub-prefect went to Shanghai with a credit of 3000 taels, given to him by the governor-general, and "plans and specifications of the most mysterious nature, in which clogged wheels, tubes, and other contrivances were inextricably jumbled together." A working model of this device was constructed in "the native and foreign workshops" of Shanghai, which "would not work."

The next year would find the persistent inventor in Peking, where he obtained a royal edict: "An Imperial Decree—The censorate has memorialized us to the effect that Tung Yu-ch'i, an expectant sub-prefect in the province of Anhwui, proposes to construct a steamboat to be impelled by a cold vapor generated without the use of fire, which shall supplant the one using fire. Its construction is already well-nigh completed, and it is estimated that 3000 taels will suffice to finish it. A diagram, with illustrations of the invention, has been presented to the memorialists for their inspection. Should the steamer invented by the officer in question be found capable of quick motion and adapted to practical use, it will of course be proper to adopt it."

Nothing more was heard of Tung Yu-ch'i or the steamer that was nearly complete. In the same year that he was constructing a working model in the workshops of Shanghai, the discovery by Wesley Gary (1845-1875) of a neutral point between the poles of a magnet, allowing for nearly perpetual motion, was printed in the respectable and bourgeois Harper's Magazine of March 1879. His discovery also drew the attention of the occult communities. It was noted in The Theosophist for November of the same year.

Steiner also learned about Keely through his affiliation with the Theosophical Society, took his idea on a threefold society from Saint-Yves d'Alveydre,78 and would become a major player on the occult scene.79 He lectured on several occasions about Keely and his discoveries, and like Blavatsky he was a wide-reaching and influential channel through which much information about Keely traveled in the occult underground. In some occult quarters this was not exactly new, since Blavatsky, Hartmann and others had preceded Steiner in that respect.

Steiner, an inhabitant of the esoteric substratum of that time, not only knew Hartmann, but also knew a host of other major occult figures. While he was general secretary of the Berlin branch of the Theosophical Society in Germany in 1906, he obtained a charter from Theodor Reuss to found a lodge of the Ordo Templi Orientis in Berlin. Before that, he was involved in a Viennese esoteric society, the Guido von List Gesellschaft that was founded in 1905 to honor that dark Viennese initiate Guido von List. List's notes and references betray the enormous influence that theosophy would have on his writings. After all, Blavatsky's The Secret Doctrine, that seminal work that would deliver Keely to the occult circles anywhere where Blavatsky would be studied, was translated into German and published in 1903. A German edition of Scott Eliott's The Lost Lemuria appeared in 1905, and both works found their way into List's writings. Thus he also mentioned the airships and the cyclopean structures of Atlantis, already written about by Scott-Eliott.

The Guido von List Society also numbered amongst its members his friend Jorg Lanz von Liebenfels. Also ever present was Franz Hartmann who is described by von List's biographer—himself a prominent theosophist—as "very honored among us."



Liebenfels, also heavily influenced by theosophy, would found the esoteric templarist order Ordo Novi Templi, with as its innermost and secret core the "Lumen Club." He held the most singular ideas; in his Theozoologie oder die Kunde von den Sodoms-Afflingen und dem Gotter-Elektron, published a year after The Secret Doctrine and two years after Fjodorow died, Liebenfels painted his bizarre vision of a new race of man that would be once again equipped with the same electro-magnetic-radiological organs as the ancient races or gods. According to Liebenfels, these extraordinary sensory organs were for the reception and transmission of electrical signals and gave the owners telepathic powers and omniscience. Liebenfels blended his extraordinary ideas on religious topics with recent discoveries in the fields of electronics and radiology, such as the N-rays discovered by Blondlot in 1887, Rontgens discovery of the X-rays a few years later, the discovery of radioactivity by the Curies in 1898 and the application of radio communication by Marconi and Herz between 1898 and 1904.

From that strange blend of occult thought and avant-garde technology that clearly obsessed him we may assume that he had studied Blavatsky's writings on Keely well, but it also had a more practical side to it. Liebenfels also successfully applied for several patents, one for some kind of propulsion system for ships, submarines and aeroplanes. The U.S. Naval office took these patents during World War II.85 Liebenfels alleged that he corresponded with the most singular persons; if true, we may glimpse a deeper layer through which Steiner's warnings cannot be simply brushed away, for early subscribers to Liebenfels' ariosophic magazine Ostara were, amongst others, August Strindberg, Lord Herbert Kitchener and Lenin, who met Liebenfels in Switzerland.

Hartmann, who had closely rubbed shoulders with Liebenfels in the Guido von List Society, had also been working with Reuss around 1902 in an occult group called the Ancient and Primitive Rite of Memphis and Misraim. It is alleged that Steiner joined this order in the same year and worked with Reuss until 1914. Reuss, who had been a member of the Theosophical Society since 1885, obtained the charters for this order from John Yarker, who also sold Blavatsky a Masonic Diploma.

Hartmann knew Karl Kellner, the founder of the Ordo Templi Orientis. It is asserted that Kellner derived much of his teachings through a Paris branch of the Hermetic Brotherhood of Luxor, the order of the American mystic Paschal Beverly Randolph. Burgoyne, who is also briefly referred to in the previous chapter, was the secretary of the order. Beside Hartmann and Reuss, other prominent occultists connected with the O.T.O. in its infant or later stages were John Yarker, Golden Dawn founders William Wynn Westcott and MacGregor Mathers, Papus and Aleister Crowley.

Hartmann met Keely around 1887, had a lengthy conversation with him and investigated his devices with the greatest interest. In connection with Keely, Hartmann also referred to a strange invention made by O.T.O. founder Kellner, an invention of which we know very little. Hartmann's short reference though, provides another glimpse deep into the occult territory, where strange technology is being developed.

That Kellner (1850-1905) was the person to involve himself in such an undertaking is not that surprising, considering he was already technically inclined. He studied natural sciences with a special emphasis on chemistry in Paris, where he may have met Robert Donston Stephenson, who studied chemistry in Munich and medicine in Paris and who pursued occult studies under Bulwer-Lytton. While in Paris, Kellner could equally have met Parisian alchemists such as the mysterious and reclusive Louis Lucas, or even the legendary Fulcanelli. Although no documentary evidence of this exists, it is alleged that in Paris, he was involved with at least one occult order - so the possibility remains.

On his return to Vienna while still a young man, he erected a laboratory for industrial consultation. He invented a procedure for the manufacture of paper, which was highly successful. The following years saw more of his inventions, and in 1895 he held 63 patents. When he died, he had more than 80 patents, among them one for light bulbs and a 1897 patent for color photography.

According to Hartmann, the instrument invented by Kellner "collects and produces electricity directly from the ether of the atmosphere without any friction of solid corporeal substances and without any chemical agency."97 Elsewhere Hartmann writes that, "Mr. Keely's power seems to be derived by changing the vibrations of cosmic ether. The machine which my friend Dr. Kellner has invented seems to be based upon the same principle, only, while Mr. Keely transforms these vibrations into some force connected with sound, Dr. Kellner's machine transforms them into electricity."

There are more fascinating cases, but quite isolated from the witches' cauldron of esoteric orders and societies and not always with apparent occult flirtations on the surface. In 1888, Scientific American published a short announcement with the suggestive title "Keely Outdone." In it, a certain William Timmins, an English mechanic residing in Pittsburgh, claimed to have invented a machine by which "untold motive power can be stored or used without the expenditure of fuel." The article stated that ".. .he has been engaged for two years in perfecting the invention, and is now negotiating with the governments of England, Russia and the United States for the sale of the right to use his discovery." Interestingly, although Scientific American brushed Timmins' device off with the remark that, "The machine seems to be simply an air compressor of the simplest sort," it also noted that part of the device consisted of "two layers of bars containing eleven different minerals, the magnetic influence of which is the secret of the inventor."

Timmins called his device a "Pneumatic Generator" and stated that it could be used to propel the largest ocean steamer afloat or to move 80 laden freight cars in one train. It would be an ideal engine in warships, but also "can be used as a defense against hostile attacks by means of air chambers placed behind the armor plating,"but in the coming years, no trains or ships were manned with his invention.


Another highly intriguing case is that of Nathan B. Stubblefield. In the 1880s, Stubblefield of Murray, Kentucky, claimed to have invented a wireless telephone with which he could "transmit vocal messages with clarity through the ground." According to Gerry Vassilatos, Stubblefield "developed an extraordinary receiver of ground electricity (which produced great quantities of electric power) and numerous 'vibrating telephones' which were used by local residents in 1887. The telephonic devices were patented in 1888 and represent the first commercial wireless telephones, using the ground as the transmission medium. ...We have photographs of his telephone sets. These reveal small, ruggedly built wooden cases which are surmounted by conventional transmitter-receiver sets. Heavy insulated cables run to the outer ground from his apparatus. Stubblefield developed an 'enunciator' (horn loudspeaker) which amplified the voice of callers. These sets of his appeared in numerous demonstrations on the East Coast, from New York to Delaware. ...Numerous private and public demonstrations of this first system were made in Murray, Kentucky (1886-1892), where the mysterious black boxes were seen. Two metal rods were stuck in the ground a few feet apart from each distantly placed set. Speech between the two sets was clear, loud, and startling despite distances of 3,500 to 6,000 feet."

Stubblefield conducted a series of tests for the U.S. Navy, which was favorably impressed. In 1898, he published a brochure to attract investors. In this brochure, he "insisted that power for his device was not generated in the cell. He calmly stated that the cell received energy from the earth." Vassilatos also writes about Stubblefield's intriguing motor, "The device features several mobile pithballs around a compass-like perimeter, resembling the equally mysterious electrostatic hoop telegraphs of the 1700s." According to Vassilatos, Subble-field's last claim made to a neighbor two weeks before he died was that, "The past is nothing. I have perfected now the greatest invention the world has ever known. ...I have taken light from the air and the earth...as I did sound."102 Stubblefield was not the only one to transmit the spoken word in this manner. In 1893, it was written that the Englishman W. H. Preece, chief engineer and electrician to the Post Office, had "put up a wire a mile long on the coast near Lavernock, and a shorter wire on Flatholm, a little island three miles off in the Bristol Channel. He fitted the latter wire with a 'sounder' to receive messages, and sent a message through the former from a powerful telephonic generator. That message on the mainland was distinctly heard on the island, though nothing connected the two, or, in other words, the possibility of a telephone between places unconnected by wire was conclusively established." And referring to the 1893 experiment on Lake Michigan to send signals to Mars by means of two long crossed lines with lights, the author muses that, "There is a possibility here of inter-planetary communication, a good deal more worthy attention than any scheme for making gigantic electric flashes." The writer then proposes the idea that the ether is the medium through which these messages are carried.

There were of course others who experimented with the etheric force that seemed to have a use to everyone's liking. In 1891, Prof. Oskar Korshelt while living in Leipzig, invented, built and experimented with a device which he called a Sonnenather-Strahlapparat, or Solar-ether ray apparatus. As Keely before him, Korschelt thought that the ether could be used for the treatment of various diseases, and his Solar-ether ray apparatus was meant as a healing device. Korschelt also published a book about his invention and the use of ether.

The Solar-ether ray apparatus collected from sunlight "the living force of the ether," that could be "radiated parallel in any preferred direction or from such a collecting point evenly in all parts of a room." The Solar-ether ray apparatus also worked on humans, animals, plants and even crystals, "very much like the sun itself, but without the harmful influences of heat and light." Korschelt had succeeded "with this apparatus, without any intermediating human nerve-system, only with instruments, to establish the working of the force which Reichenbach called 'the Od,' and which is generally called since Mesmer organic (animal) or healing magnetism."

Korschelt stated that his device "after countless tests" had finally solved the riddle of healing magnetism or mesmerism; "the ether particles, collected and radiated from the fingertips of a mesmerist or through the ejecting of the body molecules, especially the skin, prove that there are two kinds of healing magnetism; that which functions with a foreign force and that which functions with its own force  The first
kind is not different from the working of the Solar-ether ray apparatus."

Wilhelm Hubbe-Schleiden, chairman of the German branch of the Theosophi-cal Society, proudly announced a few months later that, "the researches continue with the same quietude, and are now expanded on plants in the living room and in the fields," and persons who had acquired Korshelt's device were asked to communicate their experiences.

Korschelt kept on improving his device, and from these reports we learn something of the appearance of his Solar-ether ray apparatus. During 1893, he developed a "new wire disk (nr.7), mat in the same manner, but much more powerful, has strange windings." The disk was 13 cm in diameter, and consisted of two disks, the one on the bottom made of zinc, the one on top made of copper. This disk was "bored through with spiral windings," and through these openings a "wire cable made out of five wires of copper, of which each one was gilded, one was silvered, one nickeled and one was covered with zinc, the fifth however being without a covering." The disk contained another small appendage or spire, around which "another spiral wire enveloped itself around copper pins, which are turned upwards with the spire." Both sides of the device could be used, during a period of 10 to 30 minutes. Korschelt believed that he was successful, as "very sensitive persons had seen the ether rotate around the wire disk." These sensitive persons also saw another etheric ray rotating counterclockwise with the first ray, and slightly above the device a "conus formed," in which "various sparks of different colors in their confusion form all the colors of the rainbow."

That Korschelt's devices, long after their initial conception, enjoyed some success in those quarters where such strange inventions were appreciated we may surmise from the writings of 1920s German occultist and neo-Rosicrucian G.W. Surya. Surya, of whom more is written in the next chapter, relates that he witnessed how "again and again under the Korschelt devices which were put on a tripod, sick persons would sweat profusely for fifteen minutes" and he refers to Korschelt's devices in his writings. According to Surya, Hartmann also "observed the healing of an old woman through these devices."

A year later, in 1894, while in America Colville's and Astor's books were published, the Golden Dawn opened a temple in Paris, and French journalist magnetizer Auguste Van Dekerkove suddenly decided to change his name to "Zanne." This peculiar name was given to him by his mysterious "spiritual masters." Zanne at once started to write his occult history of the world, a book that would eventually number more than 2,000 pages.110 His great interest was to find a means to reconstruct the primordial language of all mankind. His interest was similar to that of Saint-Yves d'Alveydre, who tried to reconstruct the true meaning of the symbolic signs with the help of the language of the Atlantean red race, the alphabet of which he had placed on his Archeometer. Both the interests of the French occultists were similar to the pursuits of J.K. Rensburg, the friend of Belinfante.

Also in 1894, Belinfante started to lecture in Holland about the forces of the ether in connection with gravity,111 and Dutch inventor Robert Pape, while residing in the Frisian province, claimed to have discovered a ray in which life could be prolonged. Pape built a device which he called a "Life Wave Generator." Unfortunately neither the device itself, nor a coherent description, has survived. Pathogenic and dangerous microbes placed in the field of the ray showed no sign of growth, Pape claimed, and it is alleged that his device was looked at and even tested by the scientific community.

But the rewriting of history was one thing, as was the construction of the primal mother tongue. With the ultimate aim of a modification of the surrounding universe in mind, man would recreate creation or at least redefine reality. In 1896, a Ulysses Grant Morrow, ardent follower of Cyrus Reed Teed's hollow earth doctrine, invented and completed work on a measuring device that would prove that the earth was not only hollow but that it reclined upwards, since the doctrine of Cyrus Reed Teed, also known as Koresh, held that mankind was living on the inside of this hollow sphere. The device that was actually built was called the Rectilineator.

In 1902, Clemente Figueras claimed to have built a device that could generate electricity without the use of fuel. Tesla was aware of Figueras' claims, for he sent a clipping to his friend Robert U. Johnson, the editor of Century Magazine. In Russia, Michail Filippow (1858-1903) claimed to have invented a method for the wireless transmission of the effect of an explosion from one place to another.115Filippow belonged to that part of the Russian intellectual coterie that blended metaphysics, esoterism, science, technology, mysticism and religion into a curious whole. The central figure of these circles that included amongst others Tolstoi, who was mentioned in connection with Keely in one of Steiner's lectures, Dostojevski, and Gorki who admired Filippow, was the orthodox-Christian author Nikolaj Fjodorow.

Fjodorow is a remarkable case of a highly religious and mystically inclined person who saw avant-garde technology as a means to achieve an incredible spiritual end, much as the 19th century occultists did with their passion for technology, but with lesser ambitions. His case serves as an illustration of where such a road of thought might ultimately lead. It would be interesting to trace certain elements of Fjodorow's philosophy in some of Tesla's experiments, such as the never properly explained Wardenclyffe Tower, and in some theories of the brilliant Constantin Tsjolkovski.

Fjodorow, who died in 1903, led a humble and ascetic life. The librarian with the long beard never slept more than five hours a day on a hard wooden board and sustained himself only on tea, cheese and salted fish. He was a staunch believer in judgment day, but in his opinion this could only be achieved through man himself. One thought apparently obsessed him: to find a way to raise the dead. If only the ancestors would be given a new life, man would be truly equal to Christ. The first step to reach this would be the construction of a gigantic electrical ring around the earth that would obtain the energy from the sun and the magnetism of the earth. With this ring of electrical force man would thus be able to create artificial earthquakes and floods, so that the dispersed molecules of our ancestors would be lifted out of the soil. In order to recognize these particles, man would grow special organs, so sensitive that man would perceive "the growing of the grass and the movement of all the molecules of the universe." Then the particles of our ancestors would be "sowed together."

In his remarkable visions that preceded those of Liebenfels and traveled in many aspects far beyond those of the German ariosophist, Fjodorow expected that the earth was far too small to contain all our ancestors; however, man would be completely "biologically transformed" and would re-create his "own organism" into a "perfect work of art." Mankind would be thus transformed into a "new, cosmic and immortal being" that could take "any form" and would "colonize the entire universe." The entire universe, all its suns and planets, would be used as raw material for the construction of this "new being." Universe would be liberated of the force of gravity and would become a continuation of mankind—in fact, one giant conscious being. And, as a brilliant echo or evocation of the age-old occult doctrine that was assiduously studied by its initiates, new man would be equal to God.