# 进入推测的领域：异常文献和神话故事


13 Into the Realms of Speculation Anomalous Documentation and Mythological Tales

"It is in the arcana of dreams that existences merge and renew themselves, change and yet keep the same—like the soul of a musician in a fugue."

Bram Stoker, The Jewel of Seven Stars, 1903

"In every name there is a hidden force, and when we repeat that name over and over again...we draw into our blood that spiritual force which...in time, finally transforms our whole body. "

Gustav Meyrink, Das Grune Gesicht, 1916

Recently, Joscelyn Godwin raised the important question of interpretation. He asks if one should draw the line between what one can read into an author's work, given a certain key or method, and what the author actually wrote.1 The same may be said for any amount of data or information. Should one arrive at its conclusions in a linear and, by the absence of other data, limited sense, or should one try to create other possibilities by leaving the rigid, linear trail by application of different methods?

The Keely history, which at times has been a journey into little-expected areas, has delivered an amount of data that can be divided into two classes: the non- anomalous data and the anomalous data. With the non-anomalous data concerning Keely and his discoveries at hand, I have reconstructed development of the Keely mystery in a historical sense.

The amount of anomalous data asks for a different approach. To approach these in a confined and orthodox sense would mean to discard the strange details, analogies and correlations as if they were irrelevant detritus that all history has clogging at its periphery. But one might choose to ignore; in an unguarded moment, one is uncomfortably tapped on the shoulder and again reminded of these incongruencies. With the anomalous data, we are able to create a parallel history, a speculative framework of alternatives and possibilities. Those possibilities based on speculations and suppositions may be eliminated or substantiated in due time through careful and thorough research. What remains after such an examination is valid and may be added to the set of non-anomalous data that we have now.

At the end of the previous chapter I left the trail of that which is verified by hard documentation, and instead concentrated on applying a different method of interpretation by pointing out similarities in text and content. This might be a point of criticism, but the very nature of the events demand that we take that course. The historian may be reasonable and orderly; history is not. History is far more than documents in archives; history is also largely composed of that for which there is no means of documentation. History is not a set of well-outlined and sharply defined incidents, arranged in a logical fashion. Some of its most far-reaching causes—such as the hint, the metaphor, the influence of ideas, the sudden impulse or the interchange of concepts—often come and go unacknowledged, especially in the fields of the occult, the irrational and the alternative sciences.

When we further overstep the boundaries of our conventionalism and our consensus of what we think that reality consists of, we may also glimpse that other reality, which is partly the world of the highest occultist. We may perceive another surrealist dimension: not so much a tangible one that is backed by historical documentation, but one that stretches out across the ages, across little-known events, in the air that is still stale of incense after a ceremony or a ritual; in a room that is still resonating after a heated discussion, in the unspoken philosophies of forgotten dreamers and in the curious encrypted analogy of legend, symbol, name, locality, and language.

Verne was keenly aware of Keely's discoveries, and some of it was printed in The Hunt for the Golden Meteor that was published posthumously in 1908. How could he not have been aware as he wrote the foreword to Cromie's novel. He admitted that he could only read "those works which have been translated into French"2 but we have seen elsewhere that information on Keely's researches also appeared in the French language. "I esteem myself fortunate as having been born in an age of remarkable discoveries, and perhaps still more wonderful inventions," Verne told an interviewer in the autumn of 1894, "I always took numerous notes out of every book, newspaper, magazine or scientific report that I came across. ...I subscribe to over twenty newspapers...and I am an assiduous reader of every scientific publication.  I keenly enjoy reading or hearing about any new discovery or experiment. "

There are circumstances, however, that suggest that Keely could have been affiliated with Verne in a distinctly other way, by sharing a membership in a little- known society called the Angelic Society. The Angelic Society truly bore the mark of a secret society as there exists no membership roll accessible in the archives of the Western world. The name of this order lacks in even the most learned studies of secret societies. Verne's membership and the existence of the



Angelic Society itself were established relatively recently by French author Michel Lamy, through an original method of interpretation, the careful dissection of their writings, and the unriddling of codings therein.

Lamy argues convincingly that Verne's writings were "entirely dedicated to the transmission of a message," and have "reflected the thought not of one man, but of a community."4 After all, of Verne's life Lamy remarked that, "The end of his life has been marked by a profound loneliness, a curious melancholy of being," and he further wonders: "But the whole of his existence was inscribed by the sign of the unknown. His wife, Honorine, felt haunted by some incomprehensible mystery that he would not share with anybody  Why did Jules Verne, before he died, burn hundreds of letters,
personal papers, his unedited manuscripts and his account books?  What has become
of the 3,000 or 4,000 square words that he wrote and left his son Michel? Who has destroyed them? Are they really lost?"

And indeed, Lamy makes us question what we really know, or thought we always knew about the great French author. When interviewed in the autumn of 1894, Verne showed the greatest reserve as to biographical details and it was with reluctance that he discussed his life or his books.6 Naturally we find no mention of Verne's membership in the Angelic Society in the interviews, and for this we must again turn to Lamy's researches. Set on the trail of this mysterious society by the writings of little-known late 19th century writer on cryptography Grasset d'Orcet, Lamy compiles the membership of this society as consisting of Andre Dumas, Gerard de Nerval, George Sand, Jules Verne, numerous painters and artists of all nationalities and others.

The Angelic Society was founded in Lyon in 1562 by a German named Sebastian Greif. After a while the society, closely allied to freemasonry and Rosicrucianism, named itself simply "Le Brouillard" meaning "mist" or "fog." Lamy points towards "Phileas Fogg" in Verne's A Journey Around the World in Eighty Days and his membership of the Reform Club, of which its initials "R" and "C" stand for Rosy Cross. We might add that the legend of the Rosicrucians first appeared during the reformation. Phile-as, according to Lamy, has the same meaning as poli-philo, "lover of all," and he asserts that the Angelic Society possessed a curious book titled Songe de Poliphile.

Lamy points out a multitude of similarities between Verne's initiatory novel Journey to the Center of the Earth and Sand's Laura or the Journey in the Crystal. Both are full of polar symbology. Verne's protagonist is called "Axel," Sands heroine "Alexis." Professor Hartz in Sand's novel has his Vernean counterpart in Professor Liddenbrock. Both are described as German scholars. Curiously the most famous of the Hartz mountains in Germany is the sacred Brocken peak. The Brocken is known for an optical phenomenon known as "the Brocken spectre." In 1938, a strange device called a "transmitter" was erected on the top of the peak, a tower surrounded by an array of posts with pear-shaped knobs on top. At the same time similar constructions were erected in other places in Germany.


When the device on Brocken peak began operating, there were reports of engine failure by cars that traveled in the vicinity of the Brocken transmitter.

Returning to the Keely history, we also came across the name of Jules Verne in additional instances. In connection with Astor's A Journey In Other Worlds, a slight reference to Verne appeared in the periodical The Unknown World, issued by circles surrounding the Golden Dawn. Later, occult grail seeker Rensburg referred to Verne in his writings and neo-Rosicrucian Surya dropped what might be seen as a slight hint. Verne corresponded with his visionary literary counterpart Louis Senarens, and Bloomfield-Moore writes how a scientist while witnessing Keely's demonstrations, is given to exclaim: "What would Jules Verne say if he were here?" In his 1886 tale involving an airship, "Robur le Conquerant," of which Lamy pointed out reference to the Rosicrucians—the initials of the title "R" and "C" again meaning Rosy Cross— Verne casually remarks that the most beautiful Masonic temple is erected in Philadelphia. Four years before Verne published his tale involving an airship, Keely had "given no attention whatever the occult bearing of his discovery." But in 1887, a year after Verne's singular novel, and at a time that Keely was working on his airship, "a bridge of mist" formed itself before him, "connecting the laws which govern physical science with the laws which govern spiritual science..." This "bridge of mist" is synonymous with the Angelic Society, also known as Mist, that initiated Keely, thus connecting his researches with a spiritual foundation.

There are also circumstances which indicate that the Angelic Society was not an exclusive French affair, but also had its foothold in England and the United States and that a substantial part of its message involved an intricately hidden symbology of the poles and the zodiac. Blavatsky, while investigating spiritists, was living at Girard Street, and Keely's memorial address, written by spiritist and freemason Colville, was delivered at Girard Avenue, both in Philadelphia. In that city, a Stephen Gerard had been the principal financial backer of the new Masonic temple built in 1819 on the premises of a much older Masonic temple that was destroyed by fire,14 where in 1731 Benjamin Franklin was initiated.

We will leave the application of name-analogy there, and concentrate on the Masonic Temple instead. We find that the temple is the residence of the Grand Lodge of Pennsylvania and the same one that Verne referred to. The temple was located at Broad Street, the same street where the warehouse was located containing Keely's devices that were not taken away to Boston. Other orders, such as the Knights of the Temple and The Knights of Malta also held their meetings in the Masonic Temple at Broad Street.

The temples of the Freemasons are often adorned with depictions of the zodiac. In the 18th century a Masonic grade called Knight of the Zodiac was in existence, and towards the beginning of the 19th century, the existence of a secret society called Les Illumines Du Zodiaque became known. The oldest depiction of the zodiac is found in the ancient Egyptian temple at Denderah that was consecrated to Hathor, the Mother of Light. The temple at Denderah has other, very strange features, including several illustrations on the walls of subterranean chambers. These illustrations are the only ones found in the all of Egypt depicting what modern writers have variously interpreted as being a symbol of "that which is to be expected and is preordained from times immemorial." It has also been theorized that the illustrations were of electrical devices or possibly electric light sources, or at least held as a clue that points toward the use or knowledge of an unknown power source known by the ancients.

In a number of these wall designs, the figure of a snake is depicted inside oblong tubes. Thierens, who pondered on Keely's supposed psychic abilities, departs from theosophical ground while explaining that, "Astral primal atoms appear as snakes. This is the reason that in the occult sciences left behind by Egyptian and Indian symbolism, the astral beings are depicted as snakes and that one calls the Higher Beings, that lead the evolution of the soul, the Masters of Wisdom, Nagas or snakes." Thierens' "Astral primal atoms," conceived in 1913, are clearly the next phase in the evolution of Levi's concept of "the astral light," which he also called "the great serpent," an idea which is said to have also influenced Bulwer-Lytton's concept of vril. Bulwer-Lytton in turn influenced Greg, who in 1880 introduced the term apergy for the first time in his book Across the Zodiac. As a zodiacal echo, in his novel, Greg writes how the Martians use a system of the multiplication of twelve. But we are also reminded of that highly curious Martian initiatory ritual that the protagonist in Across the Zodiac has to undergo to become a member of the "Children of the Star": "A bright mist of various colors intermixed in inextricable confusion, an image of chaos but for the dim light reflected from all the particles, filled a great part of the space before us.  Presently, a bright rose-colored point of light, taking gradually the form of an Eye, appeared beyond the mist; and emanating from it, a ray of similar light entered the motionless vapor. Then a movement...commenced in the mist. Within a few moments the latter had dissolved, leaving in its place the semblance of stars, star- clusters, and golden nebulae, as dim and confused as that in the sword-belt of Orion, or as well defined as any of those called by astronomers planetary.

'"What seest thou?'" said a voice whose very direction I could not recognize. 'Cosmos evolved out of confusion by Law; Law emanating from Supreme Wisdom and irresistible Will.'

'"And in the triple band?'

'"The continuity of Time and Space preserved by the continuity of Law, and controlled by the Will that gave Law.'

"When I spoke a single nebula grew larger, brighter, and filled the entire space. stars and star-clusters gradually fading away into remote distance. This nebula,
of spherical shape—formed of coarser particles than the previous mist, and reflecting or radiating a more brilliant effulgence—was in rapid whirling motion. It flattened into the form of a disc, apparently almost circular, of considerable depth or thickness, visibly denser in the center and thinner towards the rounded edge. Presently it condensed and retracted, leaving at each of the several intervals a severed ring. Most of these rings broke up, their fragments conglomerated and forming a sphere; one in particular separating into a multitude of minute spheres, others assuming a highly elliptical form, condensing here and thinning out there; while the central mass grew brighter and denser as it contracted; till there lay before me a perfect miniature of the solar system, with planets, satellites, asteroids and meteoric rings."

There the vision does not stop, for after answering the ritual questions, Greg's protagonist is given to witness the beginning of life in the solar system itself, all inside a "small transparent sphere within the watery globe, containing itself a spherical nucleus. From this were evolved gradually two distinct forms, one resembling very much some of the simplest of those transparent creatures which the microscope exhibits to us in the water drop...The other was a tiny fragment of tissue, gradually shaping itself into the simplest and smallest specimens of vegetable life. The watery globe disappeared, and these two were left alone. From each gradually emerged, growing in size, complexity, and distinctness, one form after another of higher organism."

Initiated, Greg's hero is now given to behold the emblem of the "Children of the Star": "Towards the roof, exactly in the center, was a large silver star.  Around this
was a broad golden circle or band; and beneath, the silver image of a serpent— perfectly reproducing a typical terrestrial snake, but coiled, as no snake ever coils itself, in a double circle or figure of eight, with the tail wound around the neck. On the left was a crimson shield or what seemed to be such, small, round, and swelling in the center into a sharp point; on the right three crossed spears of silver with crimson blades pointed upwards."

We have encountered that suspicious phrasing "mist" several times in Greg's visionary description. His Martian secret society "The Children of the Star" is also called "The Children of the Light." The Angelic Society also called itself mist or "le Brouillard," alluding to its status as a "Church of Light."

William Delisle Hay described zodiacal force and zodiamotors in his 1881 Three Hundred Years Hence. When the numbers 1881 and 300 are added, the number 2181 and then 12 is obtained. Twelve is of course the number of the houses of the zodiac; when the numbers 1 and 2 are added, the number 3 is obtained. Greg painted a vivid picture of a three-fold symbol, part of it consisting of three crossed spears. While Keely asserted that everything was composed of triune streams, the number 3 also has a special significance in freemasonry. Freemasons often refer to themselves as "brothers of the three points," a custom that was introduced for unknown reasons in the 18th century,27 the period when the Masonic grade Knight of the Zodiac simultaneously sprang into existence. Delisle Hay was not the first author to use the title Three Hundred Years Hence. He was preceded in 1836 by Mary Griffith who published a futuristic Utopian novel with the same title, which involves time travel through suspended animation.

Interestingly, Griffith's story is based in Philadelphia, in the years 1835 and 2135. Amongst others, Griffith described a new power source "not steam, not muscle," developed by a woman, that is widely used in ships, government-oper- ated trains, aircraft and ground vehicles equivalent to automobiles. The force however is not further explained.29 The fact that the power was developed by a woman may serve us to see a certain influence of ideas on Bulwer-Lytton's The Coming Race, in which he writes that women are superior to men in handling vril. As with Delisle Hay's novel, the year of publication, 1836, and the title, 300, deliver the values 12 and 3.

According to Collins, the airship of the never-identified inventor was guarded by "three men" and Hart stated that the mysterious inventor had "three assistants." Hart also alleged that there were "three airships" in existence. A freemason claimed to have learned the true identity of the inventor in a Masonic lodge. In the second part of the airship wave the inventor identified himself as Hiram Wilson. In freemasonic tradition, Hiram, also known as Hiram Abiff or the widow's son, is an important figure that was the builder of the temple of Salomo. As freemasonic legend relates, Hiram was murdered by "three unworthy men." In Dellschau's manuscripts, the mysterious NYZMA is frequently connected by the symbol of the skull and crossbones. Not only is this symbol used by the Chapter of the Skull and Bones, but it also features prominent in Masonic symbolism. The zodiac was not only depicted on the ceilings of the Masonic temples and the temple at Denderah; it was also neatly engraved on Wronski's globular Prognometer and depicted on d'Alveydre's Archeometer.

In 1912, Count Von Rosen purportedly sent Keely's secrets via Scotland to Stockholm, Sweden. It is said that the original Knights Templar fled to Scotland. It is in Stockholm that the grand lodge of the Swedish Freemasons is settled. The Swedish Rite affirms in its traditional history that Jacques de Molay, last Grand Master of the Knights Templar, committed the order into the hands of his nephew, the Comte Beaujeu, who carried it to Sweden, together with the ashes of his uncle. Another branch of Swedish freemasonry was derived from the "system of the strict observance," an 18th century Masonic system also based on the legend of the perpetuation of the Knights Templar. The word "Rose" is the Masonic symbol for the search for a higher life. In ancient Greece and Egypt the rose was the symbol for secrecy. Something experienced or learned by an adept adorned with a rose, or Sub Rosa, had to stay secret.

Freemason and Keely's friend Wiliam J. Colville published a book called Our Places in the Universal Zodiac in 1895. His book was followed a year later by a book called Across the Zodiac, written by an Edwin Pallander about whose life nothing is known. In the book a spaceship, the Astrolabe, is made operative by a giant gyroscope that nullifies gravity. Flights to the moon are made, where remnants of a dead civilization are found, and to Saturn, where life is discovered.34 Pallander used not only the same title as Greg's book, but also elements of Greg's plot, which he fused with certain elements from Jules Verne's Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Sea. Greg's Across the Zodiac was published exactly thirteen years before Bloomfield-Moore's book on Keely was issued by the same publishing house. 1880 plus 13 delivers again the numbers 12 and 3.

Cheiro visited Keely in 1890. In one of his remembrances of Keely that he hid in an otherwise fictional tale, he writes: "In the inscrutable wisdom of the Thought Force of Purpose, and the Creator of all Design, the Zodiacal system that controls this earth compels it to alter its axis once in every 25,000 years. At the end of each of these periods of Time called by men "the Precession of the equinoxes" the tilt or inclination of the Poles causes oceans to alter, continents to be swept away, civilizations to be destroyed, and new ones to appear."

Cheiro, strapped in the strange device which we have seen described earlier, travels to a remote time when the temple of Atlantis still proudly stood: "I saw stretching into illimitable distance a wide avenue of giant figures of stone leading to a vast temple, of which every part had an astrological meaning. Formed like a circle, this temple appeared divided into twelve parts symbolizing the Twelve Signs of the Zodiac and their influence on human life. In the middle of this majestic temple appeared a throne on which the Sun as the Giver of Life reigned in the form of a mangod. Rays of light charged with ions of magnetism radiated from this center to each of the twelve signs and from them again flooded the Earth-Planet as it swept through each Sign in its annual pathway through the heavens. Stars sang to stars and suns to suns in one universal vibration of harmony. Designs, with threads of gold, linked planet to planet. Purpose radiated from the Sun-God bearing life and Death within its hands.  The
wide space before the throne was filled with myriads of people. all were drawn by
some mysterious magnetic force to the Sign of the Zodiac under which they were born; every man, every woman and every child was robed in the same color as their Sign and on each forehead was their own distinctive jewel."

When we leave Cheiro's visionary description of Atlantis and its polar and zodiacal symbology, we find that Greg's Across the Zodiac, published long before Cheiro's account, exerted its influence on other writers. It is asserted that Robert Cromie's novel about a trip to Mars, A Plunge into Space, published in 1890, owed an obvious debt to Greg's work, from which Cromie borrowed his antigravity mechanism.38 The novel was endorsed by Jules Verne, who wrote his only foreword to the second edition of the book published a year later.

Lord E.'s remark in Surya's account of having had as his task to fathom the "double sphinx of force and matter" reminds us of Verne's 1895 tale le Sphinx des Glaces or The Sphinx of the Ice Fields, which Verne not only dedicated to the literary genius Edgar Allan Poe, but also to "his American Friends." In the story, Verne's protagonists encounter, behind a curtain of mist, a huge magnetic mountain in the form of a sphinx on the south pole. Verne also wrote a little-known story in 1889 about the tilting of the axis, The Purchase of the North-Pole. It is also argued on several occasions that Verne's stories are in fact a huge and elaborate code,42 and that one of Verne's characters in Journey to the Center of the Earth, called Axel, is merely a disguised form for the word AXIS.43 The same may be said for Sand's heroine Alexis.

The depiction of the zodiac at Denderah has a striking feature; it shows a deviation of the axis in relation to its current position, a detail that evokes Cheiro's visions. Greg's term "apergy" was again used by Astor in A Journey In Other


Worlds. In his novel, Astor named his spaceship "Callisto," after the moon that circles Jupiter which is the subject of a visit in his novel. However, he chose Jupiter with a very good reason, since Jupiter and Callisto are both a reference to the axes or the poles, which in his novel are such an important theme. In Greek mythology Callisto was loved by Zeus, by the Romans named Jupiter, and she bore him Areas. For this Callisto was turned into a she-bear; in the end Zeus turned her into the constellation of seven stars known as the Great Bear. But Zeus also placed their son Arkas or Areas in the heavens as Arktouros, the Polestar.

A year before Astor published his striking novel, John O'Neill published the first volume of The Night of the Gods, in which we find the layer that Astor carefully covered in name-analogy, explained: "...the Most High, the deity symbolically worshipped on High Places, was the God of the Polestar, who was seated at the Highest celestial spot of the Cosmos, the North Pole of the Heavens."

In the year that O'Neill published the first volume of his study on polar lore, Bloomfield-Moore published her book in which Keely stated the polar forces consisting of magnetism, electricity and gravital sympathy, "each stream composed of three currents, or triune streams, which make up the governing conditions of the controlling medium of the universe." Magnetism Keely described as "polar attraction," gravity as "polar propulsion."

Where O'Neill saw the Most High as the God of the Polestar, the son of Callisto and also the name of Astor's spaceship, and Cheiro called this the Sun-God, Keely envisioned the streams of polar force originating from God; "So God created man in his own image, in the image of God created he him; male and female created He them.

...All sympathetic conditions, or streams of force, are derived (if we dare to make use of such a term in speaking of Deity) from the cerebral convolutions of the Infinite; from the center of the vast realm of the compound luminous. From the celestial intermediate, the brain of Deity, proceed the sympathetic flows that vitalize the polar terrestrial forces,"47 an imagery similar to Hopkins' mystical allusion to "Adam and Eve." Bloomfield-Moore proclaimed that "The great polar stream, with its exhaustless supply of energy, places at our disposal a force  We have but to hook our machinery on to the machinery of nature, and we have a. force, the conditions of which when once set up remain for ever, perpetual molecular action the result."

While O'Neill saw the pole as the supreme Arcanum or secret, Arx being the celestial pole and Arcadia the secret of the polar sanctum, he wrote "Arkas. was the father of the Arkades or Arcadians, who claimed to be the first men. Hermes. was the (his italics) Arcadian  and the caduceus of Mercury was therefore called the Arcadian rod." The last image is synonymous with the earliest perpetuum mobile designs— material representations of an eternal cosmology—with their hollow rods filled with mercury. The first men are synonymous with Adam and Eve.

Analogous to Keely, O'Neill developed a polar interpretation for all triplets, trinities and triple figures. All fours and their multitudes, including 12's—and we have seen how from several novels the numbers 12 and 3 arise—are the symbols of the directions of space around the pole, the zodiac. In O'Neill's cosmoconception, all sevens—including 21's—refer to the twice-seven stars of the Great and Little Bears.

Between the Great and the Little Bear is Draco, which may be imagined as the dragon serpent guarding the apples of the Hesperides which grow on the axial tree. The serpent evokes images of Levi's Great Serpent or Great Dragon that he envisioned to be the carrier of cosmic life-force. The seasonal positions of the Little Bear around Draco formed a swastika around 4,000 BCE. The swastika is held as the prime symbol of the Pole in its aspect as center of the celestial or terrestrial circle; in the West, the caduceus is the prime symbol of the World axis that joins the two. While it is suggested that the Brotherhood of the Swastika was a possible influence on Bulwer- Lytton, it has been asserted that from this order the Brotherhood of Luxor originated. The highest grade of the Chevaliers bienfaisants de la Cite Sainte that was founded around 1770 on Knights Templar tradition, and to which possibly Bulwer- Lytton belonged, was named after the patron of the Merovingian Empire. The symbol of the Merovingian empire is the bear and also the bee, which in time would become the symbol of the fleur-de-lis. In the fleur-de-lis, O'Neill saw a polar interpretation as it is habitually drawn at the north point of the compass.

The planet Mars in astrology corresponds with the human head, and it is asserted that Keely's liberator corresponded in its parts to the human head. In astrology Mars is also synonymous with the reproductive organs, which play an important part in Isis symbology. Isis symbology, the painting "Et in Arcadia Ego" by Nicolas Poussin with its reference to Arcadia or Areas, the supreme secret, and the symbology of the bear— which is held as the symbol of the Merovingian Empire—are considered of special importance in the riddle of Rennes-le-Chateau. "Et in Arcadia Ego, you know," writes Sand in a letter to Gustave Flaubert, and "...more like Bedlam than Arcadia."55 a protagonist in Cromie's novel is given to utter. Cheiro visited Keely in 1890, but aside from having met with Bloomfield-Moore at her London home, he also numbered amongst his clientele Emma Calve, the famous French singer. "Cheiro told me of things terribly true in the lines of my hand, through his advise he saved me from big misfortunes," she commented. Calve had a very intimate relationship with Parisian occultist Jules Bois, who at one time lectured in Paris on the hidden Isis symbolism found in the geometry of that city. But it is also asserted that she had a relationship with abbe Sauniere.

In the history of Rennes-le-Chateau in which Sauniere was one of the pivotal characters and that started during Keely's lifetime, we find numerous connections of the strangest nature. There are those with the ancient Merovingian Empire and the Royal house of the Habsburgs, with secret services and societies, with the Vatican and with other highly placed clerical circles; there are rumors of occult orders such as the Prieure du Sion, of alchemists and Rosicrucians and it is asserted that the Knights Templar knew what the nature of the secret was. There are coded documents of uncertain origin and references to the bloodline of Christ, and the whole landscape surrounding Rennes-le-Chateau seems to have been carefully arranged in an immense sacred geometrical riddle forming a complex pentagram. At the heart of the riddle lies what possibly is an energy phenomenon of unknown nature.

Adding to the mystery, above the entrance of the church of Rennes-le-Chateau the following description is placed: "terribilis est locus iste," meaning, "this place is terrible." In the introduction to Cromie's book, Verne wrote: "Certainly, it is a terrible venture, but they need not fear; their guide is skillful and bold." Verne is considered an important factor in the riddle of Rennes-le-Chateau.

In a coded manuscript of uncertain origin that is said to have been found inside the church of Rennes-le-Chateau but which may also be a modern forgery, mention is made of "blue apples," which may be synonymous to the apples guarded by the dragon seated between the Great and the Little Bears.

Verne also writes in the foreword about the Steel Globe, the spaceship that Cromie fantasized and that was the first of its kind to be globular in shape, and "almost a perfect sphere, with only a certain flattening at the top and the bottom—like the polar depressions of the Earth." which echoes Wronski's Prognometer, Keely's Globe Motor, Schappeller's primal force machine constructed as a miniature earth and the strange ball-shaped devices of the Reichsar-beitsgemeinschaft which they called "World Globes" and their depiction of the world as an apple, "vertically sliced in halves" to demonstrate the magnetic currents and the magnetic axis. This in turn echoes the major theme in Astor's A Journey In Other Worlds.

There is an abundance of references in the writings of Albert Ross Parsons to the world-axis, the zodiac, the Pleiades, and the two lost planets called Quan and Habel from whose collision and disruption the asteroid belt was formed. We find Parsons' lost worlds-idea coupled with Bulwer-Lytton's The Coming Race, in Engel's strange novel Mallona.

According to Parsons, the center of the universe is a star in the Pleaides, and one of the galleries in the great pyramid is aligned to that star. Parsons then travels to "a remote and unknown period of prehistoric time," where he finds a humanoid race, superior to us, as in the writings of Blavatsky, ariosophist Lanz von Liebenfels and forgotten Grail seeker Rensburg. But in the fashion of Cheiro's later tale, a giant cataclysm has swept that ancient civilization away; the fall of Lucifer or Satan is to Parsons the symbol of the collision and destruction of two planets, forming the asteroid belt, inflicting the earth and tilting the axis. And after having pondered over an experiment of wireless transmission of sound, he writes: "there is a possibility of inter-planetary communication." In all this, Parsons delivers a cryptic message: the zodiac is our only means of salvation.

While it is asserted that Verne was a member of a secret society, an intellectual underground of avant-garde occultists, scientists and writers, called The Brouil-lards, or the Angelic Society, it is also claimed that he was closely associated with such occult orders as the O.T.O., The Theosophical Society and The Golden Dawn.64 The Golden Dawn founded the Ahatoor Temple in Paris in 1894 in the year that Astor's and Colville's books were printed.

Verne had also read Luis P. Senarens' stories. The two corresponded irregularly and Senares and Verne both used each other's ideas in their stories. Verne wrote about airships and his imagery is often held responsible for being highly influential in respect to the 19th century airship wave.

Verne's message appeared only in the second edition of Cromie's book that was published the same year as the book The Vril Staff was published. The main theme of this book is the strange magic wand-like device operating on vril-force that Bulwer- Lytton so aptly described in The Coming Race, the book that was one of the inspirations of the Reichsarbeitsgemienschaft. More codings: The Vril Staff was written by somebody who chose to make himself known only as XYZ, which is reminiscent of the legendary and secret NYZMA group that oversaw the equally legendary Sonora Aero Club.

It has been suggested that the ultimate secret of Rennes-le-Chateau may be a technical device with awesome abilities, fanatically guarded by secret societies and orders as the Knights Templar, the Rosicrucians and the Priory Of Sion. While we have seen how some of the most prominent 19th century occultists clustered around Keely, it is also alleged that Keely himself was a member of a secret society—if so, possibly the Brouillards—and that his devices are hidden in a church in France.

Levi tells of a secret object that the Knights Templar possessed which is met here and there in the world of dreams, but after the manner of bare allusions only. There is an interesting fictional tale about the alliance of Knights Templar with a crashed extraterrestrial named Baphomet, who supplies them with fantastic technology.

While it is said that the Knights Templar were deeply involved in the riddle of Rennes-le-Chateau, an early 19th century Templar order was involved in the protection of the secret of Wronski's Prognometer. It is also claimed that in 1984 a group of commandos, all members of a secret society, excavated a grave from the cemetery at Millau in France and retrieved a device called a Planetary Talisman or the Talisman of Set, whose immense power is said to be solar.

This reminds us of Keely's planetary system engine, the whereabouts of which are not known, Philipp's alleged solar-power-motor and the primal machine of the Reichsarbeitsgemeinschaft, being a configuration of seven ball-shaped devices. Seven is also the number of the stars of the Pleaides, and AXIS can be recognized as a sigil of Set, Set being Satan or Lucifer, according to Parsons the symbol of the destruction of two worlds and the tilting of the earth's axis. The Talisman of Set or the Planetary Talisman was then brought to Bear Island off the coast of Norway. Mention is made of Psychic Capacitators in the Rennes area, and the members of a secret society move around by levitation, UFOs and the manipulation of time.73 While it is claimed that members of the secret society involved in retrieving the planetary talisman travel around in UFOs, it is well to remember that Sweden, the country to which Keely's secrets were sent, set up the world's first UFO bureau in 1910, following a UFO wave in 1909.

The title of the book of alleged Golden Dawn initiate Bram Stoker that was published in 1903, The Jewel of the Seven Stars, is analogous to Hockley's Crowned Angel of the Seventh Sphere, a work that unfortunately was never printed, and to the seven stars that form the Pleaides or the Great or the Little Bear, another seven-star group that once formed a swastika. As in Griffiths' book Three Hundred Years Hence that involved Philadelphia, Stoker's novel, which is burdened with occult doctrine, involves suspended animation in which an Egyptian princess, adept in an ancient science, rests.75 We have already seen that the oldest depiction of the zodiac was in Egypt. Stoker visited Philadelphia in 1896 and Lamy asserts that Stoker's Jewel of the Seven Stars—according to Lamy its title refers to the seven stars in the Great Bear—is analogous to Verne's 1882 novel The Green Ray. Not only that: Bulwer- Lytton's vril is nothing else than the Green Ray, Lamy concludes.

At Verne's funeral in 1905, the year that Steiner started his lectures about Keely, an incident occurred during the ceremony that has never been properly explained. It may have a special significance, considering Verne's alleged involvement with the earlier mentioned secret societies. Among the mourners was a strange, immaculately dressed Englishman who silently approached each member of Verne's family, shook their hands, and solemnly declared in French: "Be brave, be brave in your heavy hour of trial." As soon as he passed all those along the line and gave his symbolic allusion to a terrible venture, the mysterious figure disappeared into the crowds.

There is a curious analogy with the mysterious incident at Verne's funeral. Levi too was visited by an unknown young man, somewhere in 1865. An account of this strange visit, written by Levi in a letter to the cabalist baron Spedalieri is as follows: "Between three and four in the afternoon, I heard seven short knocks on my door, in this fashion: oo-o-oo-oo. I opened the door, and a young man, very distinguished and immaculately dressed with a sarcastic air, entered." Levi told how the young man said that he knew all of Levi's past, present and future life, that it was ruled by the number five, and went on to relate several little-known facts of Levi's private life, including details of his visit to Bulwer-Lytton. The mysterious man even predicted the year of Levi's death, 1875, accurately, something that was unknown at that time.

The stranger identified himself as Juliano Capella, of Italian parentage, and went on to discuss the laws of nature, and how these could be influenced by the powers of the mind. Not a very original concept, as we have already tasted something of a deep stratum of occultists, obsessed with mind-driven or telepathic technology.

Capella offered to visit Levi another time, but Levi refused, having obtained a strange disliking for the person. Capella then left, while stating that he would "go on a perilous journey," to never return. Chacornac complained that, although he encountered numerous persons who visited Levi, he never was able to trace the mysterious Capella: "I even knew that one of the last original Rosicrucians still living in Paris, sometimes visited Levi, but of Capella, nothing." Capella's perilous journey is synonymous to a terrible venture or a heavy hour of trial, the number five is associated with the pentagram, the sign of Baphomet and the giant configuration of the Rennes area, the number seven, the times that Capella knocked on Levi's door, is also the number of the stars in the Pleaides and the Great and the Little Bears. Capella is the name of a particular star, also briefly mentioned in Cromie's novel, and stars and constellations are strewn all over: Arcturus, Aldebaran, Orion, the Pleaides, The Great and Little Bears, and Sirius. Interestingly, the ether-driven ship—the "Sirius" of Surya's account—holds a smaller vessel, thus symbolically mimicking the twin-star system of Sirius.

The year 1912 was strange and significant in the parallel history of Keely's inventions. The never-explained UFO wave, named "scareships," that would haunt England, France, Germany, and Holland, was but a year away. The terrible First World War was but two years away, and one cannot help thinking of Steiner's exclamation: "What would have become of this war when this Keely-ideal had become a reality in those days!" 1912 was a year of revelation; Steiner made his first statement meant for the general public concerning a future technology in his Huter an der Schwelle, performed in Munich. It was a year of loss; John Jacob Astor and William Thomas Stead would both perish during the terrible Titanic disaster,81 and Franz Hartmann and Bram Stoker died.

It was a year of hiding as well. The encoded name "NYZMA" was also featured prominently on every page of Dellschau's strange manuscripts, until 1912. After that year, Dellschau's coded references to NYZMA suddenly ceased. In 1912, Count Von Rosen sent Keely's secrets via Scotland to Stockholm, Sweden. Several members of Von Rosen's family were employed by the Swedish navy. It is alleged that when the Titanic sank, a ship was in the direct vicinity, but dimmed its lights and silently sailed away. The ship has never been identified.

In that strange year of 1912, inventor Otto Witt (1875-1923) chose to go to Sweden. Witt is considered the Swedish Hugo Gernsback, but with 10 times the ego. Witt wrote dozens of novels, all bursting with new and unusual technical ideas.

Witt was originally a mining engineer and through his profession would almost certainly have met that other Austrian mining engineer, Hans Horbiger, who was called the Prophet of the Welteis Lehre or, Sacred Ice. Horbigers cosmogony became the official pseudoreligion in Nazi Germany. His book was published in 1913, a year after Witt's travel to Sweden. Horbiger supposedly was once involved in a project of the tilting of the axis; allegedly there was a secret Nazi project to tilt the axis with a device not unlike Verne's "neutral helicoidal ray," called a "reflector of telluric waves," controllable at will and the invention of Dutch scientist Willibrod. Willibrod collaborated with Horbiger. Hitler even asked Horbiger at one time if it would be possible to displace the north magnetic pole, to which Horbiger replied positively.83 Adherents to Horbiger's philosophy are still to be found today, and in one of their books Keely is mentioned alongside vril.

Witt studied at the Technicum in Bingen in Germany. At the same time Karl Hans Strobl (1877-1946), the Austrian writer of unusual, dark tales, who launched Der Orchideengarten, the first magazine devoted to the fantastic in Austria, as well as Hugo Gernsback (1884-1967) studied there.

Gernsback, who is called "a would-be inventor" and "a prophet of the new technology," was a close friend of Tesla. He would often publish articles by or about Tesla in his magazines. When Tesla died, it was Gernsback who organized a death mask to be made. It is suggested that in 1924 Gernsback probably met with Harry Grindell-Mathews, inventor of a death ray who, through Gernsback, may have also met with Tesla.86 Grindell-Mathews had at one time been in South Africa, as had Robert Pape, Dutch inventor of the Life Wave generator.

Gernsback emigrated to the United States in 1904. Intensely interested in electricity and radio, he designed batteries and by 1906 was marketing a home radio set. He would coin the phrase "science fiction" and launched his first magazine in 1908, the same year that Verne's story The Hunt for the Golden Meteor was published posthumously. Gernsback's magazine was called Modern Electric, subsequently called Electrical Experimenteer and Science and Invention. Among others, Gernsback proposed the idea in 1917 to equip Mars with an artificial atmosphere in order to make it habitable. He too employed codings of some sort; his most important character, which he featured in several of his tales published in his magazine between 1911-1912 to promote unusual and avant-garde scientific ideas, was called Ralph 124C41, which is pronounced as "one to foresee for one." When the numbers are added, we once again obtain the number 12, the number of the houses of the zodiac, and again 3, which amongst others is of special significance in freemasonry.

In 1913, a booklet was published holding a large fold-out reproduction of the zodiac at the temple of Denderah, which somehow reminds us of Parson's claim. On its very last page under the heading, "The promise of the zodiac," it is written that, "It may be that a new dispensation is at hand, and that the promise of the zodiac, that has never failed us, yet, will not fail us now. But so long as the old dispensation is with us we may remember that "out of Egypt I have called my son," a cryptic foreshadowing of Gernsback's "one to foresee for one" and the modern interpretation of certain illustrations at the temple of Denderah as being symbolic for that which has been preordained since times immemorial.

Gernsback also knew Howard Philips Lovecraft, and he would publish several of Lovecraft's stories. Lovecraft (1890-1937) had read Arthur Edward Waite, and refers to him in veiled sense in three of his tales.92 Lovecraft also read the works of Algernon Blackwood, and Arthur Machen, whose writings he admired. Waite, Machen and Blackwood were all members of the Golden Dawn. A review of Astor's A Journey In Other Worlds was published in the occult periodical of which Waite was its editor. Machen had been involved in the compilation of the catalogue of the library of Hockley, who at one time worked for Denley, who in turn owned a bookstore that Bulwer-Lytton often visited.

In the tale, "The Festival," written in 1923, Lovecraft describes a church in which a tomb is found beneath an altar. Lovecraft modeled his church after a real church. It was not until 1976 that during restoration of that church, Lovecraft's seemingly fanciful tale of a crypt just before the pulpit was proven to be accurate. The crypt was not located under the present altar, but under an older, hidden altar.94 Lovecraft's fictional tale, based on fact that was later known, echoes Sauniere's discovery of a crypt in his church at Rennes-le-Chateau.

Lovecraft lived most of his life in Providence, Rhode Island, the town of Mrs. Staunton, the Paris Golden Dawn member. Lovecraft knew about Keely and his discoveries through the writings of Charles Fort and partly modeled his NYARLATHOTHEP on Keely; the word holding shades of NYZMA, THOTH and SET.

The last that is known about Keely's inventions is that they were shipped to Boston. Lovecraft is known to have made several trips to Boston. In his 1924 tale, "The Shunned House," he refers to Dr. Chase. In his 1937 story, "The Evil Clergyman," Lovecraft describes a person who finds himself in a house in London. Through the use of a strange little device that he finds in his pocket, he summons the forms of a group of clergymen, dressed as Anglicans, but clearly the members of a secret magical cult. It is alleged that this is a parallel with the Men In Black.

In 1924, Algernon Blackwood wrote a short story, "The Pikestaffe Case," in which he described the non-Euclidian geometry of a dimensional trap lurking within a mirror, reminiscent of Lovecraft's tale, "The Dreams in the Witch House." Lovecraft travelled to Philadelphia once, and Blackwood had long held an interest in the occult. He not only became a member of the Golden Dawn, but also helped to establish the Canadian Theosophical Society. In 1892, Blackwood became a reporter for the New York Evening Sun and later worked for New York Times newspapers, both of which regularly published articles about Keely.

The year before Lovecraft penned the tale, "The Rats in the Walls," in which he describes a large cavern beneath an old manor house where time is warped into reverse. In connection with Rennes-le-Chateau, it is alleged that hidden in the region a device might be located that can only be described as a "Time Portal." In 1923, the same year that Lovecraft trusted to paper the tale of a cave where time is warped into a reverse, Moholy-Nagy began the construction of his "Light-Space Modulator," and forgotten Dutch clairvoyant, Grail-seeker, the-osophist and author J.K. Rensburg wrote a remarkable preface in his book Wereldbouw or, The Building of a World.

In it, Rensburg states that the entire solar system is an organism with a central consciousness, that metals have a consciousness, and that higher, material beings live on the sun and on Mars. Rensburg praises Verne as a forerunner of "the inter-astral direction." Rensburg then writes: "there are material, superhuman people; who, like us and the animals, feed, procreate and die in higher developed worlds than our own...material gods and goddesses who may divulge their decisions and knowledge to clairvoyant persons by means of inter-astral telepathy, meaning, marconigraphy of organical nature, directly from their to our nerve-system," which echoes Parsons' concept of interplanetary communication and Cromie's fictional Inter- Planetary Communication Company Limited.

In Lovecraft's 1920 tale, "From Beyond," an inventor who blended science with metaphysics builds a device that emanates waves which enable the person to see beyond that what our sense organs usually perceive. "The waves from that thing are waking a thousand sleeping senses in us; senses which we inherit from eons of evolution from the state of detached electrons to the state of organic humanity," the inventor claims. But that is not all, for the inventor states "You have heard of the pineal gland? ...That gland is the great sense organ of organs - I have found out. It is like sight in the end, and transmits visual pictures to the brain."98 Through the rays that this device emits, people are able to see beings that live in another dimension or plane of existence.

But years before Lovecraft painted his haunting picture, in 1882 a woman said to Keely: "You have opened the door into the spirit-world." He answered, "Do you think so? I have sometimes thought I might be able to discover the origin of life." At this time, Keely gave no attention whatsoever to the occult bearing of his discovery; and it was only after he had pursued his research, under the advantages which his small Liberator afforded him for such experiments, that he realized the truth of this woman's assertion.

It was then, in 1887, that Keely was enabled to walk into the light, to cross the last barriers and jump the glittering chasm, to attend and have his membership received. There he would learn the great metaphysical truths that underpin his wonderful discoveries. He would learn of the shining, spinning zodiac and of the space-time axis. He would learn of the secrets of Atlantis, thought lost for such a long time, and of the sacred geometry that is so essential. He would come to know the mysteries of the Rosy Cross and the riddle of Rennes-le-Chateau. He would study the principles of the magnificent giant world machine and the living, breathing universe that creation is.


But we must now part company with John Worrell Keely. It has been such a pleasant company, with many a strange tale. It has been an incredible journey indeed, but we must leave the brilliant inventor and discoverer for now, turn away and silently close the door of his workshop in the Philadelphia of a century ago, and we must not disturb him any longer.
