# 揭示谎言的剖析 

6 Anatomy of an Exposure

"That Keely used the ordinary forces of nature, electrical, magnetic, chemical, pneumatic, hydrostatic, in his experiments has long been charged, but never surely proved. "
"The Keely Mystery," The Press, January 9, 1899

"There was danger that he would go down in history as a mystery. There is now no risk of that."
"The Keely Motor Exposure" Public Ledger and Daily Transcript, January 30, 1899

"Keely's discovery would lead to a knowledge of one of the most occult secrets, a secret which can never be allowed to fall into the hands of the masses."
H.P. Blavatsky, The Secret Doctrine, 1888


During Keely's life, the accusations of an enormous fraud constantly loomed over his head as reflected by the endless quarreling and viewpoints in the contemporary press. But there was always the enigmatic inventor himself, ready with an explanation or another of his stupendous demonstrations. There was also the Keely Motor Company; its members had invested large sums in the whole affair, and it must be taken into account that they had every interest in refuting the accusations. But with Keely dead and the Keely Motor Company in disarray, for it seemed that he was influential in keeping the company in a harmonious state at least on the outside, the apparent discontent now fractured the company and rendered it impotent.

So when the machinations were about to develop that led to the tragedy, there was nothing that could oversee the coming investigations that led to his alleged exposure. And it must be said, in all fairness to Keely, that those who investigated the matter after his death were prejudiced from the start.



All began harmlessly enough, and it seems, by accident. On January 6, a large cast iron sphere was discovered hidden under the flooring of Keely's workshop. "Mechanics who examined the strange contrivance are at a loss to know for what it was used." Hopes sprang up, for it could be that this sphere was the ultimate key to Keely's secret. The sphere was located underneath the floor of the main workshop, buried in the ground, and special efforts seemed to have been made to conceal it. It weighed over two tons and rested on a solid stone foundation. The object was hollow with "protruding brass connections that were evidently joined at one time to brass pipes that ran beneath the floor and led to different parts of the building." One unusual detail was reported: "When struck by a hammer the sphere emits a series of strange sounds."

The sphere was discovered when the owner of the building, Daniel Dory of 1716 Spring Garden put his men at work cleaning out the building. A short time before this, the Keely Motor Company had already relocated the motor, tools and machinery to another part of the city, and nothing was left, or so they thought. It was while they were engaged in doing the work that one of them accidentally broke through the flooring and discovered the strange piece of iron. The owner of the building said he was willing to allow the people interested in the motor to make a thorough investigation.

But apparently the cleaning up delivered more accidental discoveries: "The floor of the workroom contains trap doors which are fitted to their places so tightly that they can be lifted only with a chisel. There is no cellar under the workroom and the purpose of the traps is a mystery. Another curious fact concerning the interior of the laboratory is that the floor of a small addition to the workroom, which was built in later years by the inventor, is raised three feet above the main door of the building, thus leaving a hidden space, the contents and uses of which are not known."

There was one man though, who knew about the sphere and the traps and the false floor. This man was Jefferson Thomas, of 1932 Mt. Vernon Street, who was for many years vice president of the Keely Motor Company. He laughed when he spoke about them in spite of the fact that he "had the grip." Thomas claimed that "The trap door was Mr. Keely's coal bin. ...Dorey, the landlord, came to me last night surrounded with an atmosphere of mystery and informed me of the finding of the sphere. I dispelled the mystery. That sphere, which, by the way, weighs about 6,000 pounds, was used by Mr. Keely something over ten years ago in his experiments in levitation."1 Perhaps Thomas' statement may help to explain one of many claims that Keely was a fraud, which was published 18 years before. At that time, it was written that his secret was "nothing more nor less than the key of the door to the cellar underneath the room where Mr. Keely exhibits his motor."

A day after Thomas' statement to the press, more people came forward to explain the existence of the enormous sphere. One of them was Schuellerman. He also knew of its existence and said grumbling that, "I have known seven men to be hung from a single pine limb in Montana for crimes smaller than that committed by the reporter who told the story of the iron globe."

After having stated that the story of "that sphere of steel having been carefully buried under the floor of Mr. Keely's laboratory is a fabrication," Schuellerman also gave more details about the object: "...the sphere of cast steel...was made many years ago by the Chester Steel Casting Company, and was made to serve as a reservoir for an invention that Mr. Keely was then constructing called a multiplicator or generator. The ball whose diameter is 42 inches is hollow, having a space inside 30 inches in diameter, where the power which was formed by the generator was stored. The weight of this steel sphere is 6,625 pounds, and the entire weight of the multiplicator, including the reservoir was just 6,800 pounds."

Schuellerman then told how Keely worked from time to time on the perfection of this device, until "at last an entirely new invention on the same plans as the old machine, but much smaller in size, was constructed." Keely sold the machine as scrap iron, but kept the globe "as a weight, to be used in tests with other inventions."

It would be very convenient for opponents to say that Keely planned this all along and that he was merely masquerading the construction of a compressed air chamber by the so-called building and then discarding the device, but keeping the globe. But Schuellerman had more to say about the object. According to him, the globe was never really hidden, it just stood in the back room of the two apartments which he used as his laboratory, and about "sixteen or seventeen years ago, Mr. Keely used it in showing the wonderful lifting powers of a new invention which he called a vibratory lift. I saw him myself raise that ball, weighing so many hundreds of pounds, upon an iron tripod six feet high, without the slightest trouble, and many others viewed this remarkable feat at the same time."

Schuellerman also claimed that after the experiments, the sphere remained in the backroom for several years, "covered with dust and surrounded with broken bits of iron, until at last, Mr. Keely gave another exhibition of the strength of this new discovery, the vibratory lift." According to Schuellerman, one afternoon before an audience of scientific men, instead of lifting the heavy sphere, "the direction of the strange force was reversed, and forced the heavy ball into the ground below the flooring of his laboratory, and since that time the sphere has been in that position, with about four inches of its surface protruding through the floor in plain sight." Schuellerman also claimed that Keely often told him that he was planning on lifting the object again. The trap doors in the floor were another matter: "I want to say that the only trap door in that floor leads to a hole under the floor where Mr. Keely stored coal, and can easily be lifted, for it is a crude affair at best." Schuellerman added, almost as an afterthought, that "When the multiplicator, of which I spoke, stood in the room it was found that owing to its immense weight, the ground under its base was sinking, and an excavation was made and the dirt banked up."

Hill, Anna Keely's attorney, also made a statement concerning the globe:


"The piece of machinery buried in the ground in Philadelphia, and recently unearthed by workmen, is a portion of Mr. Keely's first engine. That was the first engine he ever made. It was made in 1874, and was of enormous size. The machine was built by Mr. Keely at an expense of \$60,000. The original scheme to obtain power by the disintegration of water was abandoned. A new system was adopted, and with the innovation came the utter uselessness of the old machine. It was so big and unwieldy that he was at a loss where he could deposit it. For various reasons he did not want other machinists to get hold of it, so he determined to bury it. He dug a big hole in the ground and covered it all but the top with earth. There was no intention to hide it. It was simply put in the ground to get it out of the way. When, after his death, I went to Philadelphia with Mr. Kinraide, we readily found the buried multiplicator. We sounded it all around and came to the conclusion that it was too big to be transported to Boston. I can positively state that it had no wire communication with any other apparatus in the Keely works."

A letter also professed doubts about the compressed air theory: "...what I wish to say in regard to the strong cylinder or globe, or whatever it may be, that is said to have been so carefully hidden. I remember distinctly that newspapers 10 or 15 years ago told of the making of such receptacles for the wonderful ether. There was then no secret about his using such appliances."

Not surprisingly, Schuellerman's viewpoint was also shared by Collier, who also told a reporter that the original device, of which the globe had been a part, cost no less than \$60,000. An anonymous person who "has been associated with the Keely interests until recently," alleged that he too knew of the iron sphere, and that Keely had used this ball "many years ago as a storage battery for his new dynamic force."

He also detailed Keely's levitation experiment, while giving the wrong estimate of its weight: "...he would attach a string of wire to the immense mass of iron. Then he would lift it from its trunnions and cause it to settle gently into an iron tripod six feet high." After the construction of smaller devices, Keely simply "twisted his wire and caused the six-ton weight to bury itself in the ground."

Thomas, who the day before made his statement, now also "mentioned the names of men who, with him, had seen the act performed." He added a strange detail: "He said in explanation of the curious sounds heard when the sphere was struck sharply that the globe contained a vibratory mechanism inside that might produce the startling noises that frightened the workmen out of the building."

A reporter who gained entrance to the workshop noted that the floor was torn up over the iron ball, which still rested in its bed of earth. "The mysteries of the various trap doors and underground arrangements of the building are still unsolved, as no one is allowed to search the deserted laboratory of the late inventor." That had to wait until Dorey, the owner of the building, received a reply from President Ackermann of the Keely Motor Company. The company had leased the building for that year, but the lease was "recently canceled by mutual agreement." Around that time, Keely's devices were already stored on North Broad Street and the workshop was more or less empty.

The opponents had their say as well; a Carl Herring of 929 Chestnut Street — although admitting that he had never visited Keely's workshop, and stating that he based his judgment on "quite a number of descriptions" given to him by "able engineers,"— thought that Keely's machines "could have been run by compressed air." He thought one of his devices was easily recognized to be "nothing more than a Cartesian diver," and another of the machines, which was described before the Engineer's Club was, "of a nature that it could well have been operated by compressed air."

Naturally Herring thought that the hollow sphere, "evidently designed to withstand very great pressures," and considering that "a very little air at a very great pressure can develop considerable power" that could be led through "extremely fine tubes," was in effect a compressed air chamber.

In speaking of the finding of what was now referred to as a "spherical tank," Professor H.W. Spangler of the University of Pennsylvania, was in his own words, "not at all surprised." He claimed that he had attended quite a number of Keely's experiments but, "I could never see anything strange in what he did on any of the occasions." Surely, Spangler was willing to give his opinion to the reporter of the Philadelphia Press. It not so much reflected his thoughts about the strange globe, but rather his vaporic gun: "I remember...when he fired a cannon by so-called hitherto unknown and mysterious force.  Keely had the machine moved along the platform as a practical proof, as he called it, that it was in no way attached to anything in the floor.

...The machine was moved all right and Keely took some water, which he said was the force used, and emptied it into the machine; but at the same time I saw him deftly lift from the floor a little piece of what looked like wire, but which in reality was a tube, threaded at the ends to screw into a larger tube which was on the floor underneath where the machine rested, and before he fixed the shots, he stooped down and put this tube in position. This may have been put in a tube running from the very spherical tank...

.However that may be, I believed and still believe that the cannon was fired by means of compressed air and not by the mysterious force, a knowledge of which he said possessed."

When additional details were released, contradictory elements cropped up. While at first the newspapers related how Dorey's workmen had found the globe, it was later written that "It was stumbled upon by Mr. Williams, who went to the property, at 1422 North Twentieth Street, with its owner, Daniel Dory."

It was further remarked that, "Why such a marvelous globe should have been ignomously buried as of no further use, is difficult to conceive. Doubters think it had a use just where it was found, no matter what it had been originally used for." And it was Mr. Williams who investigated the hollow globe more closely: "Mr. Williams says that it was tapped in several places with a small hole, reamed out at the surface to admit the flange of the plug, showing that it had been used to hold compressed air or gas. " and so the newspaper concluded that "it is more than probable that this globe has been in constant use ever since it formed a part of the laboratory equipment."

Lingering doubts were rapidly growing out of hand, but possibly the best summary of the situation was given by a Philadelphia newspaper which noted ironically that, "The cast steel cylinder...may or may not have contained compressed air. The mere fact that Keely said it was a 'multiplicator' does not settle anything, nor is the mystery solved by the belief of various members of the Keely Motor Company that it was a 'multiplicator' or storehouse of energy, or mere dead weight of convenient size to demonstrate the value of his 'vibratory lift.' That a large number of Mr. Keely's associates knew the globe was there is altogether likely, but, as it seems such a handy thing to have around if you were going to work off a few 'apergy' experiments with a little compressed air, it is not to be wondered at that physicists and engineers may view its resurrection with considerable skeptic interest."

This point of view was not always shared; a short letter sent to a newspaper professed its doubts about the compressed air explanation in connection with Keely's experiments; "I have frequently read in the newspapers of our scientists belief (some are positive) who have seen 'Keely's motor' that it was operated by compressed air being delivered to his motor through a 'thin' platina wire. The pressure exerted, I have seen stated, was anywhere from 20 to 100,000 pounds per square inch. I have not seen any statement, however, that Keely had any air compressing apparatus in his workshop, or conveniently located nearby."

How was it possible, the letter remarked shrewdly, to have manufactured such a hollow and thin wire of "considerable length" and "of such small diameter as to be flexible, as evidently Keely's wire was," and how could such a wire, be it made from platina, steel or any other material, have contained such a huge pressure "without bursting"? It also questioned how it had been possible for Keely "to compress air, without any apparatus, to such an enormous pressure, or cart it to his workshop for so many years without being discovered?" The answer by the editor was that it would be "foolish to speculate about things that might have happened, but did not, the maxim obviously applies to statements based upon pure guesswork. There is no evidence that Keely used compressed air, or that he manufactured it on the premises and concealed his apparatus." As for the wires, the editor gave the puzzling answer that "The imaginary 'wire' appears to have been made of 'compressed gas,' as an evidence of what fanciful theories people can make up when they have no facts to base them on."

But the finding of the mysterious globe was only the beginning.

Around the same time when the discussions about the globe had become quite arcane, Clarence B. Moore, the son of Bloomfield-Moore and the spokesperson for the mysterious Kinraide, announced that he had taken a six months lease of Keely's laboratory on 1422 North Twentieth Street, for the purpose of making an investigation to determine, if possible, the truth of the Keely assertions. "The investigation is already under way, but the most important discovery, Mr. Moore says, is the great steel globe.

...Mr. Moore says that the chances of making a satisfactory investigation were greatly lessened by the dismantling of the machines previous to taking some of them to Boston."

Moore had never been an impartial person, and in the midst of the preparations for his examination he confided to a reporter that he never had "any faith in the Keely pretensions, and this investigation has been started by me to see whether or not I was right in my opinion." The part that his mother, Bloomfield-Moore played in the Keely history, Moore declared, was his motive for undertaking the investigation of the workshop.19 When he realized that the memory of his mother was linked too closely to her interest in the Keely project, to which he had persistently been an antagonist, he resolved that "now or never was the hour for exposing the trickery which he was convinced lay at the bottom of the thing."

And while lamenting the fact that the upcoming investigation would be greatly hampered since the place was dismantled, "if there was any connection with the machines it had been broken," we perceive another motive, quite like the one that had played a role in the withdrawal of Bloomfield-Moore's funding some years before: Moore was asked whether his investigations indicated that there was going to be a litigation over Bloomfield-Moore's will. To this he answered that Bloomfield-Moore had written several wills, and he did not know which was the last. He was sure though, that in one of her wills she left Keely her house at 1718 Walnut Street, valued at
$60,000. "Of course she had time to make a new will after his death. I shall certainly not shun litigation, and rather than let the estate go into the hands of one incompetent to manage it I shall certainly combat the will," Moore said.

There is more reason to suspect that Moore was not really that interested in Keely and his inventions, or in unmasking him as a fraud; of the coming investigation, he held the opinion that "in the near future disclosures will be made that will absolutely vindicate the course which he took toward the motor, and which led to serious disagreements between his mother and himself. "22 So perhaps Moore had considered the inventor as a mere pawn in the intricate power struggle that existed between him and his mother over his father's will and estate.

What uncertain factor Keely represented to Moore, and how Keely in his turn aided and advised Bloomfield-Moore, we will probably never know. After all, Keely was well accustomed to a climate of slander, libel, and legal affairs, and it is quite possible that in the course of their acquaintance, more than matters of business directly relating to Keely's inventions were discussed. At this point, however, it is well to remember that Moore's investigation of Keely's workshop was the only one that was undertaken, and on which the verdict of history has come to depend. When Moore was asked who the people were with whom he would investigate Keely's workshop, he "declined to give the names of those who had been chosen to assist him in making the investigation."

In the meantime, the controversy surrounding the mysterious sphere that was found in Keely's workshop, and the compressed air theory raged on. Even if the three-ton spherical shell was capable of resisting a bursting pressure of from 20,000 pounds to 100,000 pounds per square inch, an engineer questioned, "How did Keely get air under such enormous pressure in the sphere? Did he use a pump? If so, he must have used a boiler to generate the steam to run the pump. But he did not use a pump for the reason that a plant capable of delivering air under a pressure of 25,000 pounds to the square inch could not be well concealed, and even had it been concealed, there is nothing to indicate that either boiler or pump ever existed." The engineer also pointed out the difficulty of obtaining a pump capable of pumping against a pressure of 25,000 pounds to the square inch. The manufacture of such an extraordinary device weighing "at least a ton, and, perhaps, three" would have hardly stayed secret, if such a pump could be made at all.

About the tubes through which Keely supposedly supplied the compressed air, the engineer noted that Hoadly, one of the country's leading compressed air experts, stated that steel bottles in his experiments with compressed air would not stand a pressure higher than 14,000 pounds to the square inch. At that pressure the steel bottles burst into complete disintegration, so that not a trace of them could be found. "Mr. Keely must have been way ahead of Mr. Hoadly, for apparently he not only used a much higher pressure and carried it in absolute safety, but he did it over 25 years ago, when there was no means known to science by which such a high pressure could be measured," the engineer, who nevertheless considered Keely a charlatan, ironically remarked.

Scientist or charlatan, that was what Moore was going to find out, at least that was what he told the press. On January 16 and 17, he was "carefully inspecting the premises." The place was left guarded by private detectives on Monday night, and on Tuesday, the inspection continued.27 The employment of the private detectives was probably necessary, since "an inquisitive crowd" hung around the place every hour of the day, "as if expecting to see the house crumbling or blow up."

Moore now gave the names of those who assisted him: Professor Carl Herring, who was an electrical engineer; Professor Arthur W. Goodspeed, assistant professor of physics of the University of Pennsylvania; Professor Lightner Witmer, professor of experimental psychology at the same university; Dr. M.G. Miller, who was a specialist in exploration and mound digging; and Coleman Sellers, Jr.

Moore also invited George W. Arnold, who was a carpenter and gas fitter, and engineer E.A. Scott, who had read a paper concerning Keely and his discoveries to the Engineer's Club of Philadelphia a year before.30 Scott knew the location of "every piece of apparatus exhibited there by Keely, and the object was, if possible, to see what evidences of hidden appliances had been left by the Keely Motor people, who carried off the machines.

The workshop was devoid of any machinery, since at that time these had been removed to Kinraide's laboratory, while the heavy appliances were stored in a building at Broad Street and Fairmont Avenue. The investigators found "nothing but blank walls, board partitions, bare floors," and of course that huge sinister looking sphere that still lay silently amidst the rubble. The team also allegedly found "many letters received by Keely," which for some reason had not been removed by the Keely Motor Company. The letters were written by "those who considered themselves his (Keely's) dupes and berated him for deceiving them."

Every bit of flooring was ripped up and every nook and cranny explored in the floors, walls and ceilings, and it was found that the building was honeycombed with traps, holes or piping, etc.34 The team discovered "many small tubes imbedded in the walls and concealed under floors," and were "little larger than wires" and were "said to be designed for standing high pressures." Goodspeed readily stated that the sphere could withstand a pressure of 20,000 to 100,000 pounds to the square inch, and the finding of the tubes once again revived the compressed air theory. "One tube that we found," said Goodspeed, "was nearly under and in immediate proximity to where the heavy lever testing device used to stand, by means of which I myself have seen Mr. Keely give very convincing evidence of the existence of a pressure of 20,000 or more per square inch." These tubes led the team to the conviction that either compressed air, as was Herring's verdict, or compressed gas as Goodspeed thought, was used.

Schuellerman ridiculed the idea of compressed air, but he made the surprising statement that Keely at one time "did dabble somewhat in compressed air, but it was not in connection with his motor, but in a gun which was tested near Shawmont some years ago." The air for that experiment was compressed by the S.S. White Company since Keely never had an apparatus "for doing it himself. "

The tubing found in the building was "small drawn copper stuff, none of it more than three-eighths of an inch in diameter and having less tensile strength than iron pipe of the same size would have." Schuellerman added that "It was not used for compressed air but for Keely's mysterious vapor." The discovery of the tubing came as no surprise to Schuellerman; in fact he wondered why they hadn't found more "of the stuff in the place, as there was lots of it there and Keely sometimes ran it through brick walls from one room to another."

But that was not all that the search party had found. Besides the brass tubes in the brick work and under the flooring, heavy steel tubes "of larger caliber and thicker metal" were found "under the joists of the first floor, in the earth." The tubing was designed to withstand great pressures, and apparently such tubes were made in "the early 70s by the Philadelphia company Morris & Tasker." Many "double thick" tubes made by them for Keely were returned burst, and a special set of tubes was made for him. On one occasion a foreman of Morris & Tasker took a pressure gauge to Keely's workshop which would register up to 2,500 pounds to the square inch. "Keely attached it to his apparatus, and," said the foreman afterwards, "it immediately sent the index to the top of the scale, and I was so scared I lay flat on the floor to escape the shock, expecting the place to be blown up."

The team also discovered what they thought was evidence that the huge sphere indeed had been used as a storage for compressed air, although rust on the heavy steel tube, and the fact that there was no connection with the sphere led the scientists to believe that "the tube had not recently been in use." But connections with the sphere had "evidently been made through one of the two trunnions or projections on opposite sides of the sphere." A hole through the trunnion had been closed with a plug screwed in and "planed off smooth." And another hole through the trunnion, "near where the end of the tube stopped," was still open. The team concluded that this hole was "about the proper size for a connection from the tube." Another smaller hole in the side of the sphere, placed midway between the trunnions, was just the right size for connecting one of the small brass tubes found running into the second story, and under the doorway of the first floor through the brickwork.40 Around the same time a person came forward and explained to the press that the sphere had not always been located in Keely's workshop: the man who was formerly a pupil in the school just north of his workshop said that "this great ball" used to lie on the pavement in front of the laboratory, and it was the wonder of the small boys. It was concluded, however, that "It could have performed its office just as well in that position as in any other, as the fine tube connections could readily have been made to it and concealed."

Gasfitter Arnold also had interesting things to say; according to him he ran certain gas and water pipes in the building years ago. There were three rooms on the ground floor, a front, middle and back room. The sphere was found in the middle room where "no stranger was ever allowed to enter." In this middle room Arnold continued, there was a large cylindrical tank in the southwest corner. In the back room, which was situated in a one story annex, there was an electrical battery, but "he could not tell what it was connected with." He did say that there were gas pipes with wires running through them. Also, two years earlier he had made a gas connection with a gas motor, which stood in the front room, and "showed where it had been disconnected and the end of the pipe capped." The gas motor had stood at the rear end of a large workbench on the north wall.

More, even stranger things were discovered that would render a nice and quick compressed air solution to the Keely mystery more difficult, and that would strengthen doubts as to this theory. In the back room of the workshop a small trap was found in the wooden ceiling in the northeast corner that opened into a space about one foot high. A half brick had been cut out of the wall of the two-story building, through which a "silver polished steel rod, 7 feet 3 inches long and five eight inch in diameter, was trust." This strange rod was running east and west over the ceiling of the room, and projecting through a hole under the eaves. What the steel rod had been used for, the team was unable to say. It was remarked that "at one point on the rod, which was considerably corroded on top, there was a polished place where the rod had evidently rested on a bearing, and the bright surface ran halfway around, showing that the rod had a rocking motion."

In a line with this rod under the floor of the rear room in the second story, they found "a thick metal plug with a long screw" that was screwed through a joist. The plug was holed, and on one side a small tube was connected that was cut off. The plug and tube stood directly under a place where one of Keely's devices had stood, the "revolving ball," that "would roll over just as many times as the visitor would name, Keely sitting in the middle room and looking through a small window between the two rooms and sounding a mouth organ."

All these mysterious findings led the team to conclude that not only compressed air, but also water and electricity had been used by the clever Keely: "In the northeast corner of the back room there was a water connection and sewer connection. Everything had been torn away." It was suggested that "There may have been a water motor there," since it was "hardly supposable that water closet appliances would have been removed by the people who dismantled the laboratory," and "several holes were cut through the brick wall at this point."

Moore and company also found a "disconnected insulated electric wire, which came in over a window on the second floor." This showed that "Keely had at one time been connected with an electric light station, the outside fixtures being still in place," and it was alluded to that a station of the Columbia Company was but "two doors above the laboratory."45 But all these findings did not resolve the issue. A Philadelphia newspaper remarked that the disclosures added nothing to what had previously been said, namely that Keely never demonstrated by exclusion of the use of known forces his discovery of a new force, "nor do they furnish as strong demonstration of the use by him of compressed air." Instead, the findings were considered by the newspaper to be "cumulative evidence that the mysteries of the Keely laboratory were mysterious not because of any new discovery, but because he concealed beneath the floors and in the walls the tubes through which he conveyed power through his motor."

The most controversial and puzzling statement about the finding of the tubes, the strange rod and the traps came from Kinraide. Around this time he was in his cave at Jamaica Plain sweating over Keely's devices and trying to learn his secret. Upon learning of the exploits of Moore and the scientists, he said that their discoveries "amounted to nothing." Kinraide had been in Philadelphia a week before Moore started to dismantle the workshop, and while there had made a visit to the workshop. "It did not look any different to me then than it has at any time since I first saw it," and he added that, "I told the owners of the building at that time that it would be unwise to leave the mass there, as it would create a lot of theories among those who might visit the building with a desire to make a sensation out of a small and unimportant matter."

Regarding the question about the tubing that presumably had been used in connection with the large steel sphere, Kinraide answered that he could not make "any reply to this direct question," as he had his position with the Keely Motor Company to consider. He did, however, remark that "the members of the stock company who have been putting in their money to carry on this work knew all about this force, and if they thought it was a swindle, as stated in this story from Philadelphia, they would not be long in saying so."

At this stage of the Keely exposure, the discovery of the tubing in Keely's dismantled workshop did more harm than good to Moore's assertion that he was a fraud who operated his engines on compressed air.

A day after the investigation, a Philadelphia newspaper put it in the plainest words possible: "The discussion about the power used by the late John W. Keely to run his machines, started anew by the finding of brass and copper tubing in the dismantled laboratory...has been taken up by practical machinery men, who stamp as the sheerest nonsense that compressed air or gas could have been employed, if the alleged evidence collected by Clarence B. Moore and other investigators were to be taken as proof." Instead, the compressed air theory "must be put aside by the people who are hunting for ways by which they claim Keely fooled the world," as this was done "years ago." Furthermore, while stating that they did not believe that Keely had "the knowledge of a heretofore unknown power," they had been with experts who witnessed Keely's numerous experiments, always on the lookout for evidence of such deception, and that, if Keely was guilty, this would have been discovered "many years ago."

A reporter also shrewdly noted that Consulting Engineer Herring retraced his steps: Herring, "who says he is not familiar with the uses of compressed air," made the statement in the press around the time of the finding of the globe, declaring that he was "satisfied" that Keely had used "highly compressed air." But at the time that Moore's team was dismantling Keely's workshop, he suddenly felt unsure and he told a reporter that "he did not mean to say it was absolute certain that compressed air was used, but that there was strong circumstantial evidence to that end." Herring also showed the reporter a piece of the tubing that came from the workshop. "It is very old, and Mr. Herring admitted that the Keely people could be right in their claim that the tubing was part of that used by him before he abandoned his vapor or ether force for the 'sensitizing' or 'vitalizing' power."

"Perhaps Herring remembered a statement allegedly made by Keely some thirteen years before. At that time a reporter wrote that Keely had told him 'by laying little tubes underground connected with his engine, if he built a large one, he could run all the machinery in every factory in Philadelphia by simply drawing his fiddle bow once every morning and letting the sound in to the copper globe.'"

One of the pieces of tubing had been found hanging over a hook in the laboratory, so the reporter asked Herring "if he did not think it strange that Keely should leave anything that would cause suspicion lying around." Herring answered lamely that "the spot where the tubing hung was not visited by others than Keely." He did admit though, that it was "evident" that the tubing found was not used on the machine Keely was operating when he was taken ill, as he did not believe that Kinraide, who took the machinery to Boston, would "sever tubes attached to the machines and neglect to follow up the tubes, on order to enlighten himself on the Keely mystery." Herring did believe that compressed air could have been forced through some of the tubing, and he had a solution to the question of how Keely could have driven compressed air in the sphere; according to him, no "heavy machinery was necessary, unless the 20,000 pounds pressure was to be stored in a minute or very short time, when powerful compressors and a powerful engine would be required. "No, the answer was quiet simple: hand pumps. The sphere could be filled up to the 20,000 pounds pressure by the use of hand pumps if enough time, "say a week," was taken for the task. "A start could be made," Herring suggested, "with a large hand pump, then smaller pumps could be used down to a specially constructed pump with a l-16th of an inch piston."

William F. Rudolph, the expert mechanic who had built Keely's latest engine and "frequently took apart and put together other machinery," did not think so. In response to Herring's suggestion, he said bluntly: "I never heard such nonsense. I would like to see the person who could pump up a pressure of more than 300 pounds in a 60-gallon reservoir, the size of the old sphere found, with hand pumps. It's plain that the force of the air inside would be too great to pump in more air by hand. If that's the case what is compressing machinery for. Why, to compress 20,000 pounds in a 60-gallon receptacle powerful compressors and an engine would have to be worked half a day. Then the tubes found would not stand the pressure of the stored air. I repeat that none of the Keely machines can be operated with compressed air." He also pointed to the problem of the exhaust of quantities of air used in operating the machines: Any exhaust would "make a noise, and a tremendous one if 2,000 pounds pressure were used. No such noise was heard at the Keely exhibitions in late years," Rudolph claimed. Rudolph gave the reporter a demonstration of what he meant by compressing 20 pounds of air, "which he allowed to escape through a tube of the same diameter as that found in the laboratory and about 10 feet long. The noise made by the escaping air could be heard 20 feet away," the startled reporter wrote.

The steam and air machinery company of Borton & Tierney stated that to store air to 20,000 pounds pressure in a 60-gallon tank powerful compressors and a 40 horsepower engine would be needed. And to direct the compressed air to any device, tubes "much larger and stronger than those found would be necessary."

Pieces of the tubing were shown by Herring at the annual meeting of the Engineer's Club, where they were examined by "quite a number of members," and were put on display in the office window of a Philadelphia newspaper where they were gazed at by hundreds of people. Meanwhile Moore's team claimed to have uncovered "other tubing and high pressure joints" between the floor and ceiling.

Professor Hugh A. Clarke of the University of Pennsylvania, who made "a special study of vibratory physics," came to the conclusion that Keely played on harmonicas and sounded whistles, not to set up sympathetic vibration, "but to notify a confederate in another part of the building when to turn on or shut off the compressed air, that is believed to have been the motive force employed."

And on the respectable Harvard University the discovery of the tubing was the "leading topic of university conversation here since the story appeared," but nobody wanted to say much about the whole affair, since "few of them had seen the motor, and as they had no definite knowledge of the matter, their statements were very conservative." The general opinion was that Keely was a "fake and as such unworthy of scientific notice." Professor John T. Trowbridge, the "electrical wizard whose whole life has been spent among motive forces," said that, "Keely did not invite the inspection of scientific men, but maintained the utmost secrecy in all his movements."55 But on several occasions Keely had specifically invited scientifically inclined persons, and his workshop had as its guests people such as Professors Leidy and Lascelles-Scott. Also, another newspaper wrote that "Many investigators, scientific and otherwise, have seen his experiments. United States government experts have witnessed them."

Trowbridge himself never saw the motor in operation or even a photograph of it, but in his mind the whole Keely venture was "on a par with the Jernegan scheme to extract gold from the sea." His opinion was that all great discoveries in the past had come slowly, and under the watchful eye of the world, so it simply would be "entirely out of precedent for a man to make such an overwhelming discovery almost without an effort." Professor Marks, a steam expert, intimated that he thought the whole Keely question "a humbug."

The remarks of another professor, Professor Lightner Witmer, on the findings in Keely's workshop clearly show something of the deep-rooted prejudice that Keely suffered even in death, for "The external evidence of reservoirs and tubes was hardly necessary to demonstrate the delusional character of Keely's theories. Even if these objects had not been found, the writings of Mrs. Bloomfield-Moore, the pseudo scientific jargon of Keely and the official reports of the Keely Motor Company would have furnished, upon critical examination, indisputable testimony to the unsoundness of Keelyism. ...Little more is needed to bring Keelyism to its proper place in a museum of pathological mental products."

President Ackermann of the Keely Motor Company issued a statement on behalf of the Board of Directors in which he claimed that the sphere and the tubes were "simply pieces of machinery connected with an altogether different device abandoned by Keely in 1887." The existence of the tubing was "fully known to the directors of the company and to scientists not financially interested in Keely." Besides, he added, such complicated machinery for compressed air did not even exist at any time in Keely's place, and the electric wires were "simply the remains of a burglar alarm."

But what about the "jagged parts of burst iron pipes, plates of iron pierced through as with cannon balls, heavy plank perforated with shot, and other evidences that some powerful energy had been at work to produce these manifestly imposing results?"

Those old tubes that were lying about in Keely's workshop, and which had led the stockholders and general public to believe that they were burst by his etheric vapor, were nothing more than remains of tests done by him and two employees of Morris Richmond Iron Works, they said. According to those two employees, Eugene Calwell and William Rickert, various tubes and parts of devices that were made by Morris Richmond Iron Works were tested on their strength with a hydraulic pump. Since the company did not have a pump of sufficient strength, theirs only making a pressure of 14,000 pounds, Keely ordered one specially made for him. This pump could deliver a strength of up to 30,000 pounds per square inch. With this pump, the tubes and parts were tested "up to the limit of the pump." The steel sphere was tested up to 28,000 pounds, and steel tubes were also tested, numbers of them splitting "in two." When "tubes of nine inches outside diameter, with a bore of only three inches, were split like reeds, Keely instructing the men to keep putting on the pressure."

The employees remembered one occasion, while testing a chamber of the generator with a number of New Yorkers present, a heavy plug that was screwed into the device "blew out with such a force that it broke the marble of a dwelling on the opposite side of Twentieth Street." The hydraulic pump remained at Keely's workshop all the years, a fact that was corroborated by others, in spite of Ackermann's statement that no such machinery "sufficiently powerful to compress air" was ever in Keely's workshop.

Enters Nikola Tesla. Tesla the sphinx, was in many respects as enigmatic as Keely and as little understood, even though he gave the world alternating current, and his inventions led to more patents. In their strange and wonderful visions, Tesla and Keely matched each other perfectly. Tesla arrived in America when Keely was already 10 years involved in his wondrous experiments, but had grown over the years into what was to become one of the truly great and misunderstood geniuses of the 20th century. Tesla had corresponded with and visited Bloorn-field-Moore. He signed his contract with Astor some 10 days before he chose to break the silence, amidst the furor that drew headlines in the press: "When the reservoir and the pipes were found I knew that the surmise I had long entertained was correct. I would like to think that Keely was not a dishonest fellow, and believe him simply to have been a man who erred so that he would have accomplished no great thing had he lived a dozen lives. Although he evidently used compressed air in his experiments, it does not follow that he did this deliberately to deceive." Then the genius concluded with a statement as mysterious as himself: "Acting on my conjecture, I have performed most of the experiments reported and still more wonderful ones to the lay mind."

In spite of all the statements to the contrary, the Keely Motor Company kept its head cool and proclaimed at a meeting of the company, on January 26, that its directors reaffirmed their faith both in Keely and his invention,63 and that the directors were going to meet Kinraide two days later. At that time, Kinraide was said to be "confident of his ability to complete Keely's inventions," and the directors of course expressed their "implicit faith in him."

On January 29, the opposing forces focused, and their verdict was out. On that day, a huge multipage article was published in the New York Journal subtitled the "First Official Confession and the Only True and Authorized Explanation of the 'Miracles' of the Great Keely Motor."65 The article contained statements of Hill, Anna Keely's lawyer, Smith, who had been given the opportunity to learn "Keely's Secret," and elaborate cross-section drawings of the double floors and ceilings which contained shafts and belts that lead to a water motor in the basement. This motor was discovered when the disintegrator was taken apart. "In taking down the posts which held the stationary axis on which revolved the hub of the motor, with its arms, the first fraud was discovered. This framework had no apparent connection with the engine, beyond serving as a support for the stationary shaft or axis which passed through the hub of the motor. A false box, a hollow post and a hole extending down through the floor led to a careful investigation. Under the floor, between it and the ceiling of an unused store room that was always kept locked, an iron shaft with a small pulley on it was found running through the timbers supporting the floor. The pulley and the hole in the floor were directly under the hollow post of the engine."

The team followed the iron shaft to the side of the wall, where it ended in another pulley. Directly beneath this pulley, but just above the ground floor of the room, another iron shaft came through the wall, also connected to a pulley. The team found a "small, well-worn belt which fitted over and exactly connected these two pulleys." In the small rear room that was filled with "old junk," and the floor of which was raised considerably above that of the middle room, a trap door was discovered beneath a box and an oilcloth. The trap opened over the shaft which came through the wall. "Here it was found that the shaft connected with a small water motor of peculiar construction, the water being supplied by a lead pipe coming in from the outside of the building. A small rubber tube extended from this water motor. When Moore's team attached a rubber bulb to this tube, the water motor could be started by pressing the bulb, and it would stop when the pressure was released. " The water motor was transferred to Kinraide's cave on Jamaica Plain.

When it was taken apart by Kinraide, Keely's Globe Motor revealed a "strong spring," also described as a "heavy coiled spring" with gearing that could be fitted into the globe. This spring was connected by a diaphragm that pressed against the shell, acting as a brake. The spring, "having been previously wound up was inoperative to move the globe until the brake was released. This was done by screwing up the diaphragm in the transmitter and the globe would revolve. A very small tube was used to connect the transmitter and the brake in the motor. "

The globe also contained more diaphragms, "some flexible and in order, others hard and not easily moved." Although Kinraide failed to explain how, it was "evident that these had been in some way used to operate the Globe Motor."

Keely's mysterious compass, with a match instead of a needle, was found to contain a "false bottom which concealed a piece of iron like a needle. When revolving this the 'match needle' would revolve." Keely's transmitter was found to contain yet another "simple diaphragm," that, when pressed by an outside screw, produced an air pressure which could be transmitted by a tube running to the machine when operated.

Keely's famous floating weight that had so astounded Professor Leidy and many other people nine years before, was a "very light, hollow box, with an opening in it, so arranged that when air pressure was exerted on the top of the water in the jar the water would be forced into the box, and, being made heavier than the water, would sink." When the pressure was taken off, the box would rise or float. The cover of the jar concealed yet another diaphragm and was connected with a small tube with a diaphragm in the transmitter, and this "explains the mystery."

The Vitalized Disk was found to have been made partly of iron and partly of brass. When the brass side was held against a magnet, it did not attach itself, but naturally the iron side did. The iron parts of the disk were "gilded to match the brass, giving the whole the appearance of brass." Keely's Musical Sphere also contained a coiled spring and a diaphragm "similar to that described in the Globe Motor." The wire was connected with the mouth harmonica and the sphere was a tube that led to "a bag of India rubber," that would deliver air pressure when pressed, "sufficient to release the diaphragm brake and the sphere would revolve." The awesome disintegrator was also found to contain a "tubular iron reservoir containing compressed air."

The article was to be the death blow for Keely and those who had believed in his inventions. Other newspapers of course quickly summarized the article, and the story was carried across the country. Although Kinraide, as we have seen in the previous chapter, accused Bridge of breach of faith, and the examination of Keely's engines was still ongoing at Jamaica Plain, as far as the general public was concerned, that was that, and there the matter ended.

Not so for the Keely Motor Company! After all, there was still hope that Kinraide would prove the contrary. On this a newspaper remarked that, "The explanation of Keely's secret that is said to come from Mrs. Keely's counsel bears all the marks of authenticity and is entirely in accordance with what has been generally believed by those who have seen the motor in operation. Still, we do not understand that it is actually an official statement, and we suppose that it will be disputed by the stockholders and managers just as earnestly as previous explanations have been. The kind of faith that has been imposed in Keely is hardly to be disturbed even by ocular demonstration. ...there are some people who still believe in the cabinet trick...and there are those who have believed so long in Keely that even a detailed description of his air tubes and water motor, discovered beneath the flooring of his laboratory, will be rejected by them as a device of the enemy."

And so it was; Collier and Thomas both were "loud in their denunciation of the statements and alleged expose of the principles of the motor made by Charles J. Hill, counsel for Mrs. Keely and J. Ransom Bridge." Collier and Thomas held a conference with "several other stockholders of the company and decided to issue a statement." Collier said, "The statements attempting to prove Keely's inventions to be tricks and frauds have not shaken my faith in his works. The alleged exposing of Keely's methods, which have come forward so plentifully lately, are all answerable...," and he expressed his conviction that the joint statement would "restore faith in the Keely motor. The statement will be carefully prepared and will answer specifically the charges against the inventor."

Whatever they were going to state, it would have to be good, since a reporter wrote that "those who are professing to carry on the Keely scheme must take themselves, in the public estimation, out of the class of dupes and into that of accomplices."

Whatever Collier and Thomas first planned, it probably was something different from the statement that was issued at the meeting of the directors on February 29, perhaps because of the veiled allusion to illegal practices made by the reporter.

The directors intimated that "there was deception in some of Keely's methods." Collier said that it was the "consensus of the meeting today that we have to come down to a point or two and discard some of the methods whereby Keely made his invention so wonderful to his audiences. The musical globe machine, the appliances with which he claimed to have set a-going his machinery, or, rather parts of it, is an impossibility undoubtedly." And according to Collier, "among our directors a few tried to hold out for a while, not for the purpose of aiding a deception, but simply that we might weigh everything in the scale of possibility. Well, the musical feature, the theatrical appurtenance, has been weighed and found wanting."

Collier did not know the reason for such theatrics, those were "best known to our late friend," but he also declared that "coming down to the disintegration of water, on this point, the Board of Directors stood a unit," for "We have all of us seen what he accomplished with his lifting machines. We believe the force is there."

However, the following months would reveal that the force was sadly absent, at least in the cave at Jamaica Plain where Kinraide explored Keely's engines further. After his damning statements in July of that year, as seen in the previous chapter, the Keely Motor Company fell in a sorry state of disarray. In the months that led up to Kinraide's statement, doubt lingered as was predicted by Scientific American, which wrote, "the investigations were so thorough and the results obtained so satisfactory that it is to be hoped that, once and for all, the Keely motor may be considered to be exposed, though we have no doubt that, like the scotched snake, the tail may still continue to wiggle."77 And indeed a magazine wondered: "Was it compressed air, hydraulic power or electricity? The recent exposures of trickery on the premises point strongly to the former conjecture, but the probability is that the exact modus operandi will never be absolutely established..."

What then had been Keely's motive? Was it money? While this was the explanation preferred by his adversaries who painted him as a fraud who earned huge amounts of money with his inventions, even a cynical Keely-opponent admitted that, "Keely, as a matter of fact, lived fairly well, but neither lavishly nor ostentatiously, and he spent far more time during those 20 years in the dingy little shop, with its wires and cylinders and dismantled relics of previous

Anatomy of an Exposure	159 experiments, than he did at his own hearthstone."79 And another remarked, that Keely "spent the money which he obtained in experimental investigations cannot be denied even by the most strenuous of his opponents at that time or now."80 What then happened with all the money that had poured into Keely's research? "That is a mighty difficult question to answer" a newspaper wrote, for while his "personal habits are not expensive," there was "no doubt" that "vast sums have been expended on useless machinery, devices and tools."

It was this puzzlement that could not be taken away, and that prompted the author of the passage above to muse: "If an impostor, he certainly was an extraordinary one. Few men could have maintained so successful a game of trickery for twenty-five years, not only enlisting the sympathetic interest of such distinguished gentlemen as the late Professor Joseph Leidy of the University of Pennsylvania; George H. Boker, late minister of the United States to Turkey; and the late John Welch, minister to the Court of St. James.

The puzzlement that lingered a quarter of a century later put Charles Fort, the great collector of the unexplained, in a pensive state when he summarized the aftermath as follows: "anybody who has ever tried to keep a secret for 24 hours, will marvel at this story of an impostor who, against all the forces of revelation, such as gas men, and coal men, and other persons who get into cellars—against inquisitive neighbors, and, if possible, even more inquisitive newspapermen— against disappointed stockholders and outraged conventionalists—kept secret, for twenty four years, his engine in the cellar."

This puzzlement and this lingering feeling of doubt has remained ever since. Although elaborately drawn cross-sections of Keely's workshop were published,84 and elsewhere photographs of the sphere, the trap doors and the tubes,85 there unfortunately exists no such thing of the water motor "of peculiar construction" that was found and then quickly and conveniently hauled off to Kinraide. No photograph exists of the thing, and no triumphant explanation of its fraudulent nature.

Perhaps the water motor was a relic of the days when Keely wrested his force from the disintegration of water and was therefore quite incomprehensible. This would also explain the "peculiar construction" of the device, a construction that was not further explained or elaborated upon. Although Kinraide possessed the water motor, he made no statements about it. In fact, the water motor became so forgotten that the only orthodox explanation that has survived today is that Keely solely used compressed air.86 In addition, there would not be any public demonstration or display of Keely's devices or the water motor.

As far as is known, there were no photographs made of Keely's dismantled engines and the parts that Kinraide allegedly found inside the machines. The only descriptions are the written statements, the cross-section drawings and sketches of some of his equipment.87 These sketches included a cross section of his latest transmitter, showing the hidden rubber diaphragm, the piston and his harmonica with a rubber tube and a hollow wire. A problem was in the timing of the events; the expose was published at a moment when Kinraide, considering his own statement, strangely disapproved. Why Kinraide did this, and then waited several months to make his statement that tallied with the expose was never resolved.

And who was this mysterious but pivotal T. Burton Kinraide? While contemporary sources offer only tantalizing glimpses and details, any further documentation on this character is strangely absent from the pages of history. All that we know of him now is that he was very wealthy, and that on his estate he pursued research not unlike Keely in a special cave hewn out of solid rock. His laboratory, also described as "large and finely appointed," was called the Spring Park Laboratory, and it is alleged that in this laboratory Keely and Kinraide "delved and chatted." Kinraide, who was 35 years old at the time of Keely's death, was "quietly pursuing the life of a scientist, without attracting much attention outside of professional circles." Kinraide also brought out a new induction coil that was widely used in connection with x-ray equipment. The coil is called the Kinraide coil.

Kinraide appeared several years before Keely died and subsequently became a constant visitor to the workshop, sometimes staying there for long periods of time. The two got on very well. Keely's last request had been to place all the material and data in Kinraide's hands. He had been in the house between the death and the funeral and he had accompanied Keely's widow in the carriage to the cemetery. Kinraide even paid for his grave, but after the expose and Kinraide's statements several months later, he dissolved in the mist of time, never to be heard from again.

Considering all this, we could easily present another speculative scenario: Moore and his team uncovered what they interpreted as evidence of fraud, and Keely's workshop was carefully guarded by private detectives, so that nobody could verify their claim anyway. Kinraide—who also took precautionary measures by barring his cave to reporters89—shrewdly stated what Moore wanted to hear; everything that Keely had invented amounted to nothing. Moore was satisfied and Kinraide knew very well that through Moore, the press would be informed. Months later, Kinraide's own damning statements followed. The attention of the general public was diverted and what certain people saw as the real nature of Keely's discoveries was carefully hidden from public view. Thus Keely's work could be continued elsewhere in secret, a possibility that is considered true to this day in certain occult communities.

In the meantime, Hill had successfully refuted the claims of the Keely Motor Company, which was already weakened by internal quarreling and fractures. After the expose, the status of the company was further weakened and rendered impotent. After all, the members of the company now also faced the possibility of accusations that they were accomplices in a scheme of fraud and deception. Interestingly, the expose was first printed in a New York newspaper and not in a Philadelphia newspaper. The New York newspaper was owned by William Randolph Hearst, whose mysterious role will be examined more closely in chapter 12.

Anatomy of an Exposure	161 Or was Moore, who once faced accusations of the mismanagement of his father's estate, hoping to find something in Keely's workshop that would make him rich beyond his imagination? Was he simply diverting other people's interests by proclaiming loudly that all was a fraud? Or were Moore and his mother indeed the victims of an elaborate conspiracy, as the unnamed Englishman wrote to Bloomfield-Moore? All of this we will probably never know, but the feeling that the expose could have been carefully orchestrated with a special purpose in mind prompted Fort to conclude: "It made no difference what else came out. Taboo had, or pretended it had, something to base itself on. Almost all people of all eras are hypnotics. Their beliefs are induced beliefs. The proper authorities saw to it that the proper belief should be induced, and people believed properly."

The Keely Motor Company went the same way as Keely's engines and his alleged manuscript: into oblivion. But what about the sphere, that monstrous and silent device that had started it all, but which purpose still is as mysterious as the day it was found? A newspaper suggested that the sphere be brought to the laboratory of the University of Pennsylvania, "as a curiosity for exhibition."91 This was never realized, and a year later a small notice in a Philadelphia newspaper appeared: "The big, mysterious iron sphere which John W. Keely, of motor fame used in some of his experiments, is now lying in front of the little shop, 1422 N. 20th Street, which Keely once used. It is covered with advertisements."

