# 巫师的学徒：神秘联系 

9 The Sorcerer's Apprentice The Occult Connection

"It is the fact that Keely is working with some of the mysterious forces included under the name Akasa that makes his discoveries interesting to theosophists"

R. Harte (sec. T.P.S.) introduction to Clara Bloomfield-Moore's Keely's Secrets, July 1888
"I had never heard the name NYARLATHOTEP before, but seemed to understand the allusion. Nyarlathotep was a kind of itinerant showman or lecturer who held forth inpublick halls and aroused widespread fear and discussion with his exhibitions. These exhibitions consisted of two parts—first, a horrible—possibly prophetic cinema reel; and later some extraordinary experiments with scientific and electrical apparatus."

Howard Philips Lovecraft in a letter to Reinhardt Kleiner, December 14, 1921


Philadelphia, the city where Keely lived, experimented, and demonstrated his devices almost all of his life, was a hotbed of esoteric activity, a focal point of secret societies. Philadelphia was an occult vortex where various strange and Fortean events happened before, during and after Keely's lifetime, such as automatic writing, poltergeist activity, spontaneous human combustion, falls of ice, rocks, sulfur and gelatinous substances from the skies, ball lightning, cases of teleportation, out-of-the- body experiences, encounters with the ever-elusive Men In Black, and UFO sightings, some events going back to the 18th century.

From its founding, Philadelphia attracted mystics and believers of all kinds: groups of Quietists, Dunkers, Moravians, hermits, astrologers and magicians. An unusual number of ghost stories are to be found in the Philadelphia tradition.

In 1693, a selected group of Pietists with their families led by Johannes Kelpius (1673-1708), gathered from all parts of Europe at one port, and set sail for America in their own chartered boat, the Sarah Maria. They arrived in Philadelphia on June 23, 1694, where they established their headquarters farther west on the banks of the Wissahickon River. Staunchly millenialist and communal and in possession of certain manuscripts of purported Rosicrucian origin, the group also practiced occult, healing arts and possibly cabalist studies, since Kelpius had met with Knorr von Rosenroth, the writer of the famous Kabbala Denudata that was translated by Golden Dawn co-founder MacGregor Mathers and published in 1887. After Kelpius' death, the group disbanded, but they are remembered as the originators of the Pennsylvania hex tradition. It is alleged that this group brought Rosicrucianism to America.

Philadelphia was also the town where the first American Masonic lodge sprang into existence before 1730 and where Benjamin Franklin was initiated into freemasonry; where in its Masonic temple the Royal-Arch masons, the Knights of the Temple and the Knights of Malta held their regular meetings.

In 1795, the first Utopian work of fiction published in America was printed in Philadelphia.5 In the 1840s the millenarian Millerite sect, one of many that flocked the Philadelphia streets, distributed the apocalyptic "Philadelphia Alarm."6 Philadelphia's 19th century esoteric community consisted of a dizzying mixture of spiritists, cabalists, theosophists, and various occult lodges and orders, possibly a temple of the Golden Dawn called Thoth-Hermes, a branch of the Societas Rosicruciana in Scotia established since 1879, and a temple of the Rosy Cross, re-founded in 1895 by Freeman B. Dowd, a member of the Hermetic Brotherhood of Luxor. Before that, in 1882, Dowd issued a booklet called "The Temple of the Rosicross," which became serialized between 1885 and 1888 in the occult magazine The Gnostic that was co- edited by John Keely's friend Colville.

Isaac Meyer, the cabalist of whom it is rumored was once in possession of documents on Keely's devices, privately published his learned treatise on the cabbala in Philadelphia.

Charles Godfrey Leland (1824-1903), the American folklorist and journalist whose "immersion in gypsy lore and witchcraft influenced the revival of the latter in the 20th century,"11 was born in Philadelphia. Family lore had it that one ancestor was a German sorceress and Leland always believed that he resembled her in an atavistic way.12 Another story he told had it that his baby nurse was reputed to be a Dutch sorceress who had performed rites over him to ensure his development into a scholar and a wizard. It is further alleged that his mother's relatives took pride in one of their forebears, a doctor who had acquired a reputation for sorcery.

Leland was attracted to the occult and folklore at an early age. During his youth he was often given to solitary walks through the woods and through the Swedish and Spanish neighborhoods of Philadelphia.14 He studied in Germany and led a life of exotic travel. He penetrated the mysterious worlds of the gypsies, witches and voodoo and spent several summers with the Native Americans to learn their spiritual lore. He also discovered Shelta, the secret language of the tinkers, learned to speak Romany, the language of the gypsies, and was adopted in their society. He made his literary debut in 1856 with a curious book published in Philadelphia, in which he coupled his fascination with dreams and their explanation with poetry by others as examples of interpretation.

In 1886, while in Italy, he allegedly met with a Florentine witch to whom he referred only as "Maddalena." He was introduced to other witches who divulged the secrets of the craft to him. The information obtained formed the basis of his book Aradia, or the Gospel of Witches, published in London in 1889.

After his death Leland was cremated and his ashes were returned to Philadelphia. He studied and wrote for half a century about things occult, and was also a journalist for fifteen years in Philadelphia, New York and Boston. Thus Leland, with his deep occult interests, and a journalist living at the same time as Keely in Philadelphia, would almost certainly have heard or read about him, even though no documentary evidence of their mutual acquaintance exists. There is a small and puzzling sentence in Bloomfield-Moore's writings where she states that "Should it be that Mr. Keely's compound secret includes any explanation of this operation of will-force...we shall then recover some of the knowledge lost out of the world, or retained only in gypsy tribes and among Indian adepts."17 It must also be taken into account that there are uncharted areas in both the private lives of Leland and Keely that have not been trusted to paper. Leland spent most of his life in Europe, and could easily have met with Newbrough, Colville, Hartmann or Paschal Beverly Randolph, as they too frequented European spiritist and esoterist circles.

Randolph (1825-1875) founded the Brotherhood of Eulis and stood at the base of the Hermetic Brotherhood of Luxor, which had a Rosicrucian temple in existence in Philadelphia in 1895 through its member Freeman Dowd.

Before spending the remainder of his life in Boston, Randolph traveled to Europe in 1855, 1857 and 1861. It is said that he met with Levi and Bulwer-Lyt-ton.18 In France, he mixed in the Mesmerist circles around Baron Jules Du Potet de Sennevoy and Louis Alphonse Cahagnet. There Randolph discovered that, unlike most American spiritualists, the French Mesmerists were well versed in the Western magical and occult traditions. What also made a profound impression on Randolph was their use of magic mirrors, crystals and drugs, especially hashish, during spirit evocations . In 1861, he traveled to the Near East, where he learned a different kind of magic from the wandering dervishes. On his return to America, Randolph publicly denounced spiritualism and his role as a passive medium. Interestingly in 1861 Keely was, according to his own admission, "exposing spiritualistic mediums" in St. Paul, Minnesota, and was "nearly run out of town for doing so."

Instead of spiritualism, Randolph began to teach a complete system of practice and theory in which he saw man as having the task to first become individual, then a divine individual and in the end to become a god and to travel endlessly through infinite universes. Randolph also beheld the universe as being filled with vast hierarchies of elementals, as Newbrough would declare some twenty years later in his strange Oahspe.

It is asserted that Randolph, who was a close friend of President Abraham Lincoln, was also a member of the Societas Rosicruciana In Anglia, a branch of which was established in Philadelphia in the 1879 through the Societas Rosicruciana in Scotia. In 1880 the Philadelphia branch was renamed Societas Rosicruciana In United States, and afterwards Societas Rosicruciana Republicae Ameri-cae. The same year a college in Boston received a charter.20 Randolph also founded the Fraternitas Rosae Crucis in Quatertown, Pennsylvania.21 The Societas Rosicruciana Republicae Americae reportedly still exists today under the name Societas Rosicruciana Civitatibus Foederatis. The Masonic Rosicrucian order is, as was before, only open to master masons.

Helena Blavatsky (1831-1891) resided in Philadelphia for a while. She would become one of the most influential figures in the occult world, and through her writings Keely would become known in esoteric communities everywhere.

Henry Steel Olcott, co-founder of the Theosophical Society, also lived in Philadelphia for a while, and along with Blavatsky investigated the claims of spiritists Jennie and Nelson Holmes. The Holmeses, through Robert Dale Owen, a former U.S. Congressman and foreign ambassador and leading spiritualist, appealed to Olcott to allow them to test their powers. The first seance was held on January 11, 1875, the last on the January 25. Olcott agreed to investigate and was accompanied by Blavatsky.

Blavatsky resided at 1111 Girard Street. After the Holmes investigation she would stay in Philadelphia "for many months. "24 She might easily have met with Keely in that time period, although she never wrote of a meeting with him in her account of the investigation in Philadelphia.25 While she devotes some space to new scientific discoveries in her 1877 Isis Unveiled, and while the quotation in chapter 1 clearly shows that a kindred spirit already existed, she does not mention or refer to Keely.

This would change, for when The Secret Doctrine was published in 1888, she stated in its pages that, "In the humble opinion of the Occultists, as of his immediate friends, Mr. Keely, of Philadelphia, was, and still is, at the threshold of some of the greatest secrets of the Universe; of that chiefly on which is built the whole mystery of psychical forces, and the esoteric significance of the 'Mundane Egg' symbolism."27 She also held it that "Mr. Keely's discoveries corroborate wonderfully the teachings of Occult Astronomy and other Sciences. "

Thus she not only admitted that "the Occultists" were interested in Keely's inventions, but she also linked Keely to the esoteric doctrines, and this assured that other occultists everywhere who read her book turned their attention to the Philadelphian inventor. In fact, Blavatsky referred to Keely more than once in her seminal 1888 opus. The chapter titled "The Coming Force," refers to Babcock's 1881 pamphlet "Exposition of the Keely Motor," the back of which read: "The Doom of Steam, or, The Coming Force." Both titles in turn referred to The Coming Race, by that other great and mysterious initiate, Bulwer-Lytton.

Blavatsky's interest in Keely's inventions was fueled by Bulwer-Lytton, with whom an age-old and secret tradition breached the surface. This high initiate, alleged Rosicrucian, politician and friend of the French magus Eliphas Levi did not only influence the course that Blavatsky would take—reading one of his novels started her career as author while still residing in St. Petersburg29— she would later catch a glimpse of her favorite author during the Great Exhibition at Crystal Palace in 185l.

Not only Blavatsky's career as a writer began by reading Bulwer-Lytton, early theosophy was principally inspired by his writings. Blavatsky's fascination with Egypt as the fount of all wisdom arose from her enthusiastic reading of Bulwer-Lytton's books. Only inher second book The Secret Doctrine, the location of the "source of ancient wisdom" would shift from Egypt to the Far East.31 Also, his most famous and most curious book The Coming Race would influence generations of occultists, and ultimately helped a secretive Berlin group formulate their ideas on the generation of free-energy in the 1930s.

Edward George First Baronet of Bulwer-Lytton of Knebworth (1803-1873) was a curious man with deep-ranging esoteric interests, and it is with him that we may clearly see the entanglement of occult lore and avant-garde science emerge for a brief but influential moment. Bulwer-Lytton studied at Cambridge, was elected to parliament in the 1830s, knighted in 1838 and made a baron in 1866. He was one of the most popular authors of his day with his collected works totaling over one hundred titles. Today his fame as an author is largely forgotten except for the book The Last Days of Pompeii, published in 1834.

In the fields of horror and science fiction literature, Bulwer-Lytton would earn fame with three influential novels by which he is still remembered to the present day. These were his 1842 Rosicrucian initiatory tale Zanoni, A Strange Story published in 1861 and his enigmatic The Coming Race.

These novels would form the foundation of a whole current of occult fiction. Thus, parts of Zanoni found their way in Randolph's Mysteries of Eulis, who borrowed from it without acknowledging it. Later the current of occult fiction was popularized by Theosophist Marie Corelli (1855-1924). Bulwer-Lytton's novels also became essential reading for occult adepts, such as the initiated of the Argenteum Astrum, Aleister Crowley's renegade order founded after his fraction with the Golden Dawn, although The Coming Race is strangely absent from its required reading list.

In these novels Bulwer-Lytton connected scientific reasoning with occult elements, based on contemporary theories of animal magnetism, hypnotism, space and time,34 a curious fusion that was noted by Thomas H. Burgoyne, co-founder of the Hermetic Brotherhood of Luxor. Under the nom de plume Zanoni, after Bulwer-Lytton's 1842 novel of the same title, Burgoyne remarked that Bulwer-Lytton was "thoroughly convinced of the great value and importance of uniting ancient alchemy with modern medicine."


Recently it has been noted that the descriptions of magical rituals in Bulwer- Lytton's A Strange Story are similar to means of contacting extraterrestrial inhabitants and other-dimensional entities, and that A Strange Story in fact offers a classification system of these beings.

Bulwer-Lytton appeared to the audiences of his day as a successful and perhaps a somewhat eccentric writer, but in his private life he was deeply involved in occult pursuits. He became the member of at least two, possibly three, occult societies, not only in England but also abroad. According to Wynn Westcott, one of the founders of the Golden Dawn, in 1850 Bulwer-Lytton was appointed "member in absence" of the exclusive German high-grade Rosicrucian lodge "Karl zum aufgehenden Licht" based in Frankfurt. This ancient lodge was founded in the 18th century and was one of the last representatives of a German Masonic-alchemical Rosicrucian system. One of its members was the well-known Masonic historian Georg Burkhard Kloss (1787-1854). Until the early 19th century, this lodge was involved in alchemical activities and members had their own alchemical laboratory at their disposal. Bulwer-Lytton allegedly corresponded with this lodge and became intimate with their alchemical teachings and doctrines.

It is also alleged that Bulwer-Lytton became the Grand Master of the College Metropolitain in 1871, whose members were closely allied to the Rosicrucian lodge "Karl zum aufgehenden Licht." The College Metropolitain consisted of the highest and secret class of members of the order of the "Chevaliers bienfaisants de la Cite-Sainte" that was founded around 1770 on Knights Templar tradition. The highest grade of the Chevaliers was named after the patron of the Merovingian empire, the Cite Sainte, or the Holy City of course being Jerusalem. Members of this order were prepared for theurgic magic, the intercourse with "spiritual, material, invisible and visible beings" and the "transcendent experience of the Rose-Cross," inside a special room, called the "Chambre d'Operation." The College Metropolitain also had an "inner order" that zealously guarded the "true secrets." The College Metropolitain had connections to the Order of the Strict Observance, also modeled after Knights Templar tradition.

In 1871, Bulwer-Lytton also became Grand Patron of the Societas Rosicru-ciana In Anglia, the mother lodge of the Philadelphia branch the year that The Coming Race was published. The Societas Rosicruciana In Anglia was founded in 1865 by Robert Wenthworth Little and was only open to master masons, the same being the case with its American branches. Members of the Societas Rosicruciana In Anglia included not only Randolph, but also Rudolph Steiner, Eliphas Levi, MacGregor Mathers, William Wynn Westcott and William Robert Woodman. In 1888, Mathers, Westcott and Woodman would found the Golden Dawn.

From Zanoni alone it is already evident that Bulwer-Lytton was well versed in Rosicrucian literature. He read that strange novel Le Comte de Gabalis, written by the equally mysterious abbe Montfaucon de Villars, which he quotes in Zanoni.42 Since the occultists took Bulwer-Lytton's Zanoni very seriously and


considered its writer a high initiate, other offers for membership would follow. Interestingly, there is little historical evidence that Bulwer-Lytton was further involved in either Masonic or Rosicrucian activities—although it is hinted that he was a freemason43—or that he belonged to any occult society except for his honorary membership in the Societas Rosicruciana In Anglia. John Yarker, the occultist and notorious promoter of bogus Masonic grades, and who had sold Blavatsky a Masonic diploma, also tried to interest Bulwer-Lytton in one of his Masonic systems. As with other letters by esoteric and occult orders, Bulwer-Lytton never bothered to reply.44 Most historians of the occult consider this proof that he was only theoretically interested in the occult sciences.

But considering his membership of one, possibly two very exclusive continental orders, the reason for his lack of interest in other occult societies of his time may very well be that he was far deeper in the occult strata than most of his esoterically inclined contemporaries, who held him in high esteem. There were also stories by those who claimed to have witnessed his demonstrations of his telekinetic abilities, strange rumors of how he became increasingly eccentric towards the end of his life, morbidly afraid of being left on his own, terrified of being buried alive, and tales of his curious nickname "the old sorcerer."

Bulwer-Lytton also mixed in circles that included the great English mystic and visionary seer William Blake. As a result, he became well versed in the art of geomancy, for in this, he was initiated by William Blake's friend John Varley, and it is asserted that he and Varley "worked at astrology together." Later the two, including the English statesman and Prime Minister Benjamin Disraeli, were often given to debates on the pros and cons of witchcraft, spiritualism and "they plunged into discussion and experiment...they even tried their hands at crystal gazing."

Disraeli (1804-1881) was a close friend of Bulwer-Lytton, and at one time Bulwer-Lytton drew up his astrological chart. Disraeli not only shared Bulwer- Lytton's deep-rooted interest in matters of the occult, but he also perceived the existence of secret societies as something very real, and he held this belief his entire life. Disraeli wrote of his belief in several novels involving secret societies and political conspiracies.

In 1856 in the House of Commons, Disraeli not only warned against the threat posed by secret societies in Europe, but also of the danger of supporting Italian revolutionary movements because of the influence of the secret societies in these movements. Disraeli also said that "a great part of Europe—the whole of Italy and France and a great portion of Germany, to say nothing of other countries, are covered with a network of these secret societies."

There is also Bulwer-Lytton's cryptic and somewhat similar reply in a letter to Hargrave Jennings, who sent him The Rosicrucians, their Rites and Mysteries, that was published a year before Bulwer-Lytton's The Coming Race shook the occult undercurrents to their very foundations. In this letter, Bulwer-Lytton wrote: "There are reasons why I cannot enter into the subject of the 'Rosicrucian Brotherhood,' a society still existing, but not under any name by which it can be recognized by those without its pale." At the foot of the letter, he added a postscript which read: "Some time ago a sect pretending to style itself 'Rosicru-cians' and arrogating full knowledge of the mysteries of the craft, communicated with me, and in reply I sent them the cipher of the 'Initiate,' not one of them could construe it."

Not only from his letter to Hargrave Jennings, but also from Zanoni it is evident that Bulwer-Lytton's occult knowledge was profound, highly detailed, and went beyond the limits of a mere theoretical nature. This could only stem from sources which carefully guarded that knowledge: the esoteric societies themselves. Zanoni was published years before his memberships of the Societas Rosicruciana In Anglia, the German Karl zum Aufgehenden Light and possibly the College Metropolitain. It is possible that long before he joined these orders, Bulwer-Lytton may have been involved in other alchemical and Rosicrucian circles, of which his contemporaries did not even know their names—real secret societies whose existence both Bulwer-Lytton and Disraeli alluded to.

There are speculations as to the identity of these secret societies; for instance a mysterious Rosicrucian order is referred to, an order variously known as the Fratres Luces, the Order of the Brotherhood of the Light, the Order of the Brotherhood of the Cross of Light, or the Order of the Swastika, that was located in Paris and that may have formed the model for the Golden Dawn. The English adepts came to learn of its existence through unconventional means, such as crystal gazing. In 1873, the contact with Cagliostro resulted from it. Therefore allegations that Franz Anton Mesmer and Cagliostro were members of the Fratres Luces must be treated accordingly. Nevertheless, Mesmer was one of the sources of inspiration for Bulwer-Lytton who himself had gazed in crystals, and created his concept of the vril-force.

Another clue was found in Bulwer-Lytton's writings; the mysterious D., the proprietor of an occult bookshop in Zanoni very much existed in actual life. He was identified as John Denley, and his occult bookshop was, as Bulwer-Lytton admitted, "one of my favorite haunts." Denley's bookshop was visited by a shadowy group of people from the occult undercurrents. One of them who worked for Denley copying old occult manuscripts was the Rosicrucian seer Frederick Hockley (1808-1885).

Hockley developed an interest in spiritism and experimented with crystal gazing as early as 1824. In 1864 he became initiated into freemasonry and would join various lodges. In 1872, a year after Bulwer-Lytton's honorary membership, Hockley was appointed a member in absence of the Rosicruciana In Anglia, and in this he was advanced into the highest grade. In 1875 he became a member of the Metropolitan College. Two years later he was appointed a member of the Theosophical Society as an "honor" that was bestowed on him by Olcott. He also went to Paris, where he met with an "invisible power," and in one of his manuscripts he refers to an unnamed society in France, "followers of the Rosy Cross."

Perhaps as a result of this, Hockley was considered to be "a true Rosicrucian adept" and he himself believed to be working in the Rosicrucian tradition. But he is also claimed to have been a member of the Fratres Luces and it is asserted that this order indeed existed. The order was of a very exclusive nature; Westcott who was a member of the Rosicruciana In Anglia and would later be one of the founders of the Golden Dawn, tried to join but was refused.

Another person who knew both Hockley and Denley well and visited the latter at his bookshop to acquire his source materials there, was the equally mysterious Francis Barrett, a self-described Rosicrucian whose home was the center of an occult group. Barrett, who lived and died in poverty, published the tremendously influential The Magus, or the Celestial Inteligencer in 1801. Strangely he had another passion—that of aeronautics.

There is also Lytton's well-documented connection with the great French magus Eliphas Levi. Levi was known in English occult circles, but it was admitted that very little was known of his writings which were not translated into English at that time, even among members of the Societas Rosicruciana In Anglia of which he was appointed honorary member in 1861. Levi even commented upon the fact that, while visiting London in the spring of 1854, he encountered "amidst much that was courteous, a depth of indifference or trifling. They asked me forthwith to work wonders, as if I were a charlatan, and I was somewhat discouraged, for, to speak frankly, far from being inclined to initiate others into the mysteries of Ceremonial Magic, I had shrunk all along from its illusions and weariness."

Yet Eliphas Levi (1810-1875), who was the most important occultist at that time and of whom it was claimed had direct contact with surviving members of the original Rosicrucians, found reasons enough to visit Bulwer-Lytton in London in 1853 or 1854. During his visit Bulwer-Lytton came to appreciate Levi's vast occult knowledge and became his friend. Levi visited him again in 1861. During his second visit, Levi presented him with three of his books, and inscribed these with long and friendly dedications.

Bulwer-Lytton's son admitted to Golden Dawn member Arthur Edward Waite that indeed his father had known Levi, but that he thought that this acquaintance was first established in either Paris or Nice. It is suggested that Blavatsky also met Levi while studying Mesmerism in France. Not only Bulwer-Lytton's, but also Levi's influence looms heavily in her later doctrines.

When a chapter of the German Theosophical Society was founded in 1884 in the German town of Elberfeld, the ceremony took place in a "Chambre d' Operation" that was consecrated by Levi in 1870-1871, around the time that The Coming Race was published. This occult space was a sacred room like the College Metropolitain and the French magicians were known to use, and before them the 18th century Illuminates. Descriptions of such rooms are sketchy at best. It is alleged that such an occult space was "only scarcely lit by candles and was used for meditation and magical practices." Olcott was present during the founding of the German Theosophical chapter. Wilhelm Hubbe-Schleiden, who visited Blavatsky on several occasions, was appointed its president. On the outside the chapter, called Loge Germania, was modeled like a Masonic institution.

Wherever Bulwer-Lytton and Levi first met, Levi's visits to London were of the utmost importance to him as well, for he explains that during his first visit, the physical manifestations of the invisible presented themselves to him for the first time during elaborate magical rituals that he conducted through the mediation but not the presence of Bulwer-Lytton.63 During his second visit, Levi allegedly conducted a magical ritual with Bulwer-Lytton at the Pantheon in London.64 It is held that Bulwer-Lytton's A Strange Story that was published a year later was heavily influenced by this occult experience.

At that time, Levi developed his concept of "Astral Light" which he also called "the Great Serpent" or the "Great Dragon," that he envisioned to be the carrier of the cosmic life-force66 and was regarded by some as the cosmic memory of the aether, the equivalent of Akasha. This astral light was called "Sidereal Light" by earlier occultists. The invisible and diaphanous region around the earth corresponded to the astral body of man, which Paracelsus called "ens astrale" or "Sidereal Body" and which he linked with the stars.67 Blavatsky called it the "sidereal force," which in turn helped Dutch literator and grailseeker Rensburg, Belinfante's friend develop his philosophy of "Inter astral Siderism."

It is believed that Levi—any correspondence between Levi and Bulwer-Lytton after their second meeting is strangely absent68—provided the root of the idea of vril, the mysterious force that Bulwer-Lytton described in The Coming Race. This could very well be so, since it is alleged by Bulwer-Lytton's son that in a letter by Levi, there was talk of "the existence of a universal force and its use. "

"What is vril?" the unnamed hero of Bulwer-Lytton's novel asks in astonishment. "There is no word in any language I know which is an exact synonym for vril. I should call it electricity, except that it comprehends in its manifold branches other forces of nature, to which, in our scientific nomenclature, differing names are assigned, such as magnetism, galvanism, &c...in vril they have arrived at the unity in natural energic agencies, which has been conjectured by many philosophers above ground...by one operation of vril, which Farraday would perhaps call 'atmospheric magnetism,' they can influence the variation of temperature—in plain words, the weather; that by other operations, akin to those ascribed to mesmerism, electro-biology, odic force, etc., but applied scientifically through vril conductors, they can influence over minds, and bodies animal and vegetable, to an extent not surpassed in the romance of our mystics. To all such agencies they give the common name vril."

Vril, the "all-permeating fluid," can "destroy like the flash of lightning" or could "replenish or invigorate life," "heal or preserve" or "cure disease." Vril "enables the physical organization to re-establish the due equilibrium of its natural powers, and thereby to cure itself." With vril it is also possible to "rend way through the most solid substances." From it, light is extracted that burns "steadier, softer and healthier than other inflammable materials" and thus flowers and foliage are more brilliant in color and larger in growth.

Vril is evoked by hollow staffs, having in "the handle several stops, keys, or springs by which its force can be altered, modified, or directed—so that by one process it destroys, by another it heals—by one it can rend the rock, by another disperse the vapor—by one it affects bodies, by another it can exercise a certain influence over minds. It is usually carried in the convenient size of a walking-staff, but it has slides by which it can be lengthened or shortened at will. When used for special purposes, the upper part rests in the hollow of the palm with the fore and middle fingers protruded." Its power, however, is not the same in the hands of any carrier; instead it is "proportioned to the amount of certain vril properties in the wearer, in affinity, or rapport, with the purposes to be effected."

Along with vril have come certain biological adaptations; the bodies of the underground race, the Vril-ya, are filled with vril, and one must have this hereditary adaptation to use it properly, which is a special nerve in the hand: "The thumb...was much larger, at once longer and more massive. ...Secondly, the palm is proportionately thicker than ours—the texture of the skin infinitely finer and softer— its average warmth is greater. More remarkable than all this, is a visible nerve, perceptible under the skin, which starts from the wrist skirting the ball of the thumb, and branching, fork-like, at the roots of the fore and middle fingers."

Women are superior to men at handling these staffs, since the "female professors are eminently keen," owing to their "finer nervous organization" to the perception of vril,76 and therefore have "a readier and more concentrated power over that mysterious fluid or agency which contains the element of destruction."

In The Coming Race, numerous devices are described as airships, elevatorlike lifts, automata that perform tasks that are animated and controlled by vril, and personal flying wings: "These wings...are very large, reaching to the knee, and in repose throw back so as to form a very graceful mantle. They are composed from the feathers of a gigantic bird.  They are fastened round the shoulders with light but strong springs of steel; and, when expanded, the arms slide through loops for that purpose, forming, as it were, a stout central membrane. As the arms are raised, a tubular lining beneath the vest or tunic becomes, by mechanical contrivance, inflated with air, increased or diminished at will by the movement of the arms, and serving to buoy the whole form as on bladders. The wings and the balloon-like apparatus are highly charged with vril; and when the body is thus wafted upwards, it seems to become singularly lightened of its weight."

The influence of The Coming Race was enormous. Greg's Across the Zodiac was partly inspired by it. The first novel of English writer C.J. Cutliffe Hyne, who fantasized about the legendary Atlantis, was modeled after Bulwer-Lytton's book. Tesla himself admitted that he read The Coming Race. The whole occult world noted it. In Isis Unveiled Blavatsky exclaimed that Bulwer-Lytton "allowed his readers to take it as a fiction," and she saw the similarity of vril with Von Reichenbachs Od, Levi's Astral Light and Akasha amongst others. "Absurd and unscientific as may appear our comparison of a fictitious vril invented by the great novelist, and the primal force of the equally great experimentalist, with the kabalistic astral light, it is nevertheless the true definition of this force," she wrote.

Golden Dawn member Waite also saw the similarity between vril and Levi's Astral Light, and we may only guess at the extent of its influence upon such orders as the Golden Dawn, which after all, sprang forth from The Rosicruciana In Anglia that had included Bulwer-Lytton amongst its honorary members. We have already seen how Bulwer-Lytton was mentioned in a scathing review of Astor's A Journey In Other Worlds. This not only is again another proof that Bulwer-Lytton indeed was read by those circles surrounding the Golden Dawn, but also that Astor's novel that was influenced by Keely had been looked upon by the same coterie. Interestingly, several writings of Rosicruciana In Anglia member and Golden Dawn founder Westcott were published by the Theosophical Publishing Society. It is therefore quite possible that the initiates of the Golden Dawn not only meditated on the deeper meaning of vril but also read Bloomfield-Moore's pamphlets about Keely which appeared under the same imprint, and later would have studied Blavatsky's statements about Keely in The Secret Doctrine. Colville expressed his admiration for Bulwer-Lytton's concept of vril when lecturing on the human aura: "...the word Vril, which was certainly derived from Vir, the superior man. The simple force of energy of life, the pure spirit of humanity, is Vril, and this it is which builds and heals and can exhibit power to command all combinations of varying elements to appear and disappear."

Burgoyne of the Hermetic Brotherhood of Luxor was highly impressed by Bulwer-Lytton's novel. He compared the manipulations of vril by the Vril-ya with the handling of the magnetic currents of the Earth and the Akasha by the first human race, "ethereal but sufficiently material to be objective and tangible."

Later, anthroposophist Steiner would express his admiration. After World War I he confided to Guenther Wachsmuth, the German translator of The Coming Race, that Bulwer-Lytton "had seen what was possible in evolution, especially by the discovery of heretofore unknown forces of nature. The imagery of Bulwer-Lytton's novel is partly a memory of the now lost abilities of mankind in the earliest prehistory of the Atlantean era, but especially a vision of the coming phases of evolution, a very essential contribution."

The many resemblances and similarities between The Coming Race and Keely's inventions were also noted by a newspaper a year before The Secret Doctrine was published: "It is no doubt a marvelous story, that told by John Worrell Keely, a fairy tale of a force which puts to shame the omnipotent 'Vril' of Bulwer-Lytton's fancy."

When The Secret Doctrine was printed the following year, Blavatsky excitedly concluded that Keely had stumbled upon great tilings and, beside more wonderful analogies, she beheld the analogy with Bulwer-Lytton's vril: "Sound, for one thing, is a tremendous occult power. Sound may be produced of such a nature that the pyramid of Cheops would be raised in the air...that which he (Keely) has unconsciously discovered, is the terrible sidereal Force, known to and named by the Atlanteans MASH MAK...It is the Vril of Bulwer-Lytton's The Coming Race.. .It is the vibratory force, which, when aimed at an army from an Agni Rath fixed on a flying vessel, a balloon, according to the instructions found in the Ashtar Vidya, reduced to ashes 100,000 men and elephants, as easily as it would a dead rat. It is allegorized in the Vishnu Purana in the Ramayana and other works, in the fable about the sage Kapila whose glance made a mountain of ashes of King Sagara's 60,000 sons, and which is explained in the esoteric works, and referred to as the Kapilaksha— Kapila's eye."

Theosophist Scott-Elliot too perceived this analogy with the vril-force that by now had reached mythical proportions: "In the earlier times it seems to have been personal vril that supplied the motive power—whether used in conjunction with any mechanical contrivance matters not much—but in the later days this was replaced by a force which, though generated in what is to us an unknown manner, operates nevertheless through definite mechanical arrangements. This force, though not yet discovered by science, more nearly approached that which Keely in America is learning to handle than the electric power used by Maxim. It was in fact of an etheric nature."

Since The Coming Race was such an important influence on the occult undercurrents, various searches have been conducted to establish Bulwer-Lytton's sources of inspiration. On the surface one finds parallels between Baron von Reichenbach and Franz Anton Mesmer. Mesmer in turn was highly influenced by the renaissance alchemists and cabalists Agrippa and Paracelsus, thus forming another link between the Rosicrucian tradition and Bulwer-Lytton, beside Eliphas Levi and through him the French occult undercurrents. Mesmer's name crops up time and again in Bulwer-Lytton's esoteric novels and one author has even suggested that "without him the vril-concept of the English writer would hardly have been developed in this form. " Others have pointed towards the little-known writings of the French author Louis Jacolliot as the source for Bulwer-Lyton's idea of vril and on the influence of Montfaucon's strange book by explaining that the term "Gabalis" is a Paracelsian term, meaning the vital energy that animates the world. The case obtains another intriguing dimension when we read that it is suggested that Bulwer-Lytton obtained his idea of the mysterious vril-force from Keely.

This theory was proposed because of the similarity in ideas between Bulwer- Lytton's aerial craft and Keely's inventions. However, at the time of publication of The Coming Race, Keely was still seven years away from his first rudimentary antigravity experiments, which around 1887 would lead to the construction of "a flying machine." 

Bulwer-Lytton obtained the idea of aerial craft by reading Comte de Gabalis, tor in Montfaucon Villars' most curious novel we find not only numerous references to "the subterranean people" and "the people from the air," but also the tale of the "aerial wanderers" who were said to have "fallen from aerial ships," a story that is often repeated in UFO-literature.

Levi and Bulwer-Lytton dabbled somewhat with strange technology. It is therefore doubtful that Keely's concepts directly influenced The Coming Race. There is a tangible link though, however small, between Bulwer-Lytton and Keely, and this is to be found in the person of Bloomfield-Moore.

Clara Bloomfield-Moore (1824-1899) was an extraordinary and highly intelligent woman who developed a deep interest in matters scientific and occult. She corresponded with hundreds of scientists in all parts of the world,93 including Tesla, whom she met at least once, as well as early aviation pioneer Hiram Maxim. At one time, she offered financial support to Maxim if he would go to America to consult with Keely and "become the custodian of the latter's secret."

Around Bloomfield-Moore, we see an unusual clustering of some of the most famous, wealthy and influential people of her day, such as her wealthy acquaintance Astor. After the death of her husband in 1878, she would remain in London. A year later she would meet and develop a warm friendship with the famous literary poets Elisabeth Barrett Browning and Robert Browning. After she became Keely's supporter, she tried to convince Browning that his poem "Childe Roland to the Dark Tower Came" symbolized the whole Keely affair. But on this the poet politely answered that "Childe Roland was only a fantaisie, that he wrote it because it pleased his fancy." And as she interpreted to Browning the meaning in the light of Keely's discoveries, "he listened with interest and a smile of doubtful meaning played over his features, for Mr. Browning never expressed any faith in this modern Prometheus as to his commercial success." But according to her, "One Christmas evening we were amusing ourselves by 'Keely's Discovery' as the subject. Much more expeditiously than I had written down the rhymes to which he was to confine himself in its composition, he wrote the sonnet."

Bloomfield-Moore was also presented to the court of Queen Victoria. Both her daughters married nobility; one daughter married Swedish Baron Carl von Bildt, who at one time had been Secretary of the Swedish Legation in Washington. Her other daughter married Count Carl von Rosen, who would eventually become First Chamberlain and Master of Ceremonies at the Court of Stockholm, Sweden. It was the son from this marriage, Count Eugene von Rosen, who allegedly sent "Keely's secrets" to Sweden. Her home in London was often the resort of writers and artists.

There also was another side to her complex character. She gained a reputation with the public for eccentricity, possibly because her London home witnessed visits of those of the occult circles, such as Cheiro, Colville, Leland, Golden Dawn member Westcott, and theosophists Besant and Blavatsky. Bloomfield-Moore's writings are remarkable for their deep esoteric knowledge. In her 1893 book about Keely one encounters the cabala, theosophy, occult templarism, the Rosicrucians, Jacob Bohme and a host of other occult and hermetic doctrines. She was not a theosophist, according to Count Eugene von Rosen when he was asked this obvious question: "No. She was interested in the study of theosophy as a broad-minded woman. She was interested speculatively, but did not believe in it."

If not a theosophist, and we have only von Rosen's word for this and he says nothing of the countless other esoteric societies to which she may have been affiliated, she certainly had occult leanings as her book and pamphlets clearly demonstrate. With Blavatsky, Bloomfield-Moore developed a relationship that is described as "long" and "intimate," and Blavatsky used selections from her writings about Keely in The Secret Doctrine. As a rather interesting detail, a son of the marriage of one of her daughters, Count Erich Carl Gustav von Rosen, founded the Finnish Air Force in 1918 by presenting it its first airplane. Von Rosen, a noted expediter and archaeologist, had his arms painted on the upper and lower surfaces of both wings of the aircraft. His arms formed the swastika, derived from his expeditions in the Orient. The swastika of course also formed an integral part of theosophical symbology before it became used for far more sinister purposes.

Another of Bloomfield-Moore's acquaintances also cooperated in her quest to promote Keely. I inspected a copy of her 1893 book in a private collection, that is inscribed by her as follows: "Howard Hinton Esq, from the compiler in grateful acknowledgment of aid in making known Keely's discoveries. October 9, 1893," and this leads us to the chance discovery of a writer with remarkable ideas: Charles Howard Hinton (1853-1907).

Hinton was the author of many essays about the fourth and other dimensions in space and time. These were collected in his Scientific Romances published in 1886 and Scientific Romances: Second Series, published in 1902. His interest was partly inspired by Edwinn Abbott's curious 1885 novel Flatland. Hinton wrote a novel about a circular, two-dimensional world, An Episode of Flatland in 1907. Hinton's many essays were an attempt to find a scientific rationale for the existence of ghosts. He also tried to imagine a four-dimensional God from whom nothing in the human world can be hidden. We may trace influences of Hinton's ideas to H.G. Wells' novel The Time Machine that was published in 1895." Interestingly, Hinton's 1904 book The Fourth Dimension is listed in an authoritative UFO bibliography in the group, "The search for extraterrestrial intelligence." As with Bulwer-Lytton's novels, The Fourth Dimension was obliged study material in Crowley's Argenteum Astrum.

As was self-described Rosicrucian Francis Barrett and her acquaintance Astor, Bloomfield-Moore had always been intensely interested in aerial navigation. But apart from the 19th century esoteric milieu in which she was involved, the direct link between Bulwer-Lytton and Keely is to be found in her acquaintance with Disraeli, with whom she was "on very friendly terms." Disraeli had been involved in occult experiments and crystal gazing decades before with his friend Bulwer-Lytton.

Disraeli died the year that Bloomfield-Moore came to learn of Keely's existence by reading Babcock's pamphlet with its reference to The Coming Race.


Since their association was a very friendly one and given the nature of the intellectual pursuits of the two, Disraeli and Bloomfield-Moore may have discussed Bulwer- Lytton's strange legacy and undoubtedly in the course of their conversations Disraeli may have confided to her at least some of his beliefs in the existence of secret societies.

Would it be entirely coincidental then, that Bloomfield-Moore referred to the connection between Keely and Bulwer-Lytton when she wrote in 1893 that "When Bulwer wrote of 'a power that can replenish or invigorate life, heal and preserve, cure disease: enabling the physical organism to re-establish the due equilibrium of its natural powers, thereby curing itself,' he foreshadowed one of Keely's discoveries."103 It is therefore entirely possible that the assumption that Keely was influenced by the works of Reichenbach, which were published in 1862, and Bulwer-Lytton's 1871 The Coming Race is a valid one. If this is the case Keely probably obtained this knowledge from Bloomfield-Moore.

Thus, the initiates Bulwer-Lytton and Levi passed on the Rosicrucian tradition and provided the philosophical foundations upon which occultists and notably Blavatsky would build their own repertoire. Blavatsky was an admirer of and influenced by both Levi and Bulwer-Lytton; Bloomfield-Moore had been closely associated with Disraeli, Bulwer-Lytton's friend and companion in occult endeavors and experiments. Bloomfield-Moore became Keely's supporter and friend. Bloomfield-Moore and Blavatsky would develop a long and intimate friendship. Keely found his way in the pages of Blavatsky's The Secret Doctrine.

Keely was rejected by the scientific establishment, and history was quite ready to forget him, but through Bloomfield-Moore's efforts he found a warmer welcome in that other sphere of reality, the occult underground, especially with the theosophists. The Theosophical Society was founded in New York on November 17, 1875, by Blavatsky, Henry Steel Olcott, William Quinn Judge, J.S. Cobb, Seth Pancoast, H.J. Newton and Emma Hardinge Britten, who allegedly also was a member of the Hermetic Brotherhood of Luxor and from her days as a teenage medium belonged to more than one secret society that included important figures of occultism. Olcott was elected first president, Pancoast was elected vice president.

Like Levi's occult heritage and Bulwer-Lytton's strange tales, Blavatsky's ideas would reverberate through the occult world, and this would eventually even transform the very language: the word "occultism" was unknown in the English language before its appearance in 1877 in Isis Unveiled.107 Through Blavatsky, who was one of the most influential people in the shaping of the 19th century occult framework, countless other occultists, theosophists and esoterists read about Keely and his discoveries.

The first edition of The Secret Doctrine sold out quickly, necessitating a new printing. William Thomas Stead, who received his copy from Blavatsky herself, wrote in a letter dated December 8, 1888: "I have read only your preface and the chapter on Keely, in whose discoveries I am much interested." Like Hardinge Britten, Randolph, Blavatsky, Olcott, Colville and Newbrough, Stead was an advocate of spiritism. He also edited the spiritualistic publication Borderland between 1893 and 1897. At one time, Stead invited Cheiro, who visited Keely in 1890, to inspect a haunted house.

Much like Theodor Reuss, the co-founder of the Ordo Templi Orientis who was a police spy, Stead is said to have been an informant. He was also a journalist and as editor of the then-radical and sensational London Pall Mall Gazette. He gave heavy coverage to the gruesome Whitechapel murders committed by Jack the Ripper. In this capacity, he accepted articles on the Whitechapel murders by Robert Donston Stephenson.111 In this strange, dark, and haunting figure we again see a spider-thin thread leading to Bulwer-Lytton.

Stephenson, who also called himself Dr. Roslyn D'Onston and had as his occult pen-name 'Tau Tria Delta,' led a mysterious life riddled with strange coincidences. He studied chemistry in Munich—where he could have met Hartmann who studied medicine there. Stephenson also studied in Paris where he could have met Kellner who studied natural sciences with a special emphasis on chemistry in the same city. What is certain is that Stephenson did have some doings with certain Italian secret societies—the kind of which Disraeli sternly warned against—as he fought with the revolutionary Garibaldi. Stephenson also pursued occult studies under Bulwer-Lytton, and in later years he allegedly lectured on the occult. In 1890, he was living with Mabel Collins, novelist and editor of Lucifer, the journal of the Theosophical Society. There are some vague allusions to his practicing ritual magic. Whatever the truth, Stephenson published a curious booklet in 1904 that consisted of comparative Biblical studies. After this, he just vanished from the pages of history. Like Astor, Stead would die during the tragic Titanic disaster in 1912.

Tesla and Edison also learned of Keely through Blavatsky's book. Tesla had other sources of information as well, but both refused to visit Keely. Apparently this led to no hard feelings, since Bloomfield-Moore quotes both Tesla and Edison in her book. A quotation of the latter she borrowed from one of Blavatsky's writings: "I don't believe that matter is inert, acted upon by an outside force. To me it seems that every atom is possessed by a certain amount of primitive intelligence."

The fact that Edison was quoted by Blavatsky is not that surprising, considering his membership in the Theosophical Society since April 4, 1878, a few months after Keely extended an invitation to him. A little-known facet of Edison's character was that he was a believer in reincarnation and was interested in other psychic matters as well.

Blavatsky's statements about Keely would continue to appear, even after the publication of The Secret Doctrine. In an article, published four months after her death, her views on Keely were once again put forth, together with a hint of a possible disintegration experiment: "Add to this the forthcoming long-promised Keely's vibratory force, capable of reducing in a few seconds a dead bullock to aheap of ashes." It demonstrates that like Bloomfield-Moore, she kept her faith in the reality of Keely's discoveries since the day that she first came to know of him. 

Thus it was no mere coincidence that in 1896 during a theosophical conference in
New York, "a high regard for Keely" was being exhibited. During the convention, acting president of the Theosophical Society J.D. Buck read a paper in which he stated that, "No one holding firmly to the mechanical theory of the universe has advanced a single step in any real discovery or apprehension of the essential truths of cosmic or human evolution. The single exception is J.E.W. Keely of Philadelphia.

J.E.W. Keely seems to combine the intuitions of the seer with the practical knowledge of mechanics, and is at once a scientist and a philosopher. Though he has nowhere completely formulated the old philosophy to which I have referred, his conception of the constitution of matter and the correlation of force is in complete harmony with it. In his apprehension of the working powers of nature he has no equal in his generation."

And a month later, during a marriage ceremony, English Theosophical President Hargrove alluded to Keely in connection with ancient Egyptian knowledge, which was now theosophical doctrine: "In those days they understood the meaning of vibration.  ...Remember too, that the sounds you will hear...are vibrations, and they, too, belong to the magic of antiquity, which it will before long become our duty to revive."

Eventually through Blavatsky's writings the whole occult world learned about Keely. Even today those wishing to learn more can read Blavatsky's comments side by side with Bloomfield-Moore's statements about him in The Secret Doctrine. The book remains in print and the passages about Keely are still to be found in its pages. The Theosophical Society was to become Keely's domain after his death, but his alleged exposure would cause ripples on the serene lakes of theosophical content even there.

Apart from contemporary newspaper accounts, it is in the slowly yellowing pages of theosophical pamphlets and magazines like Lucifer and The Theosophist that an interesting change in tone may be gathered from these writings about Keely. After his alleged exposure by Clarence Moore, Keely was to become temporarily degraded to a marginal and humiliating footnote in the writings of the theosophical superstars.

When news of his alleged exposure reached the theosophical camp, Olcott was quick to write an apology for Blavatsky's favorable writings about him, for these had become a big problem. The exposure led several French esoterists—and from this we have a confirmation that information about Keely was not only available but also studied by some of the French occult scene—to question the veracity of Blavatsky's writings; certain theosophists of the French section demanded to know how it was possible that the discovery of Keely's discredited inter-etheric force was treated in the The Secret Doctrine as "a great fact," whereas it was a complete swindle; and how far this contradicts the declaration that the book was "inspired, directed and corrected by the Masters of Wisdom."

Olcott wormed his way out of this embarrassing position, and thus providing us some insight into Blavatsky's sources of information by stating that: "Of her own knowledge she knew nothing about Keely and the validity of his pretensions, she got her facts at second and third hand, from Mrs. Bloomsfield-Moore, Mr. Evans, and other old patrons of Keely."

Olcott admitted that there might be something extraordinary about Keely after all "at least in the beginning, Keely possessed some extraordinary psychical powers, however much he may have cheated later, when possibly those forces in him were exhausted, than that he was a scamp throughout  It is sheer nonsense to say that such superior
scientists as Prof. Leidy, Mr. Wilcox and others, and the master mechanics of railways and other skilled mechanics who examined and reported favorably on the Keely motor of Philadelphia, when his first syndicate was formed to utilize the invention for railways, were suddenly stricken blind and mentally paralytic."

Olcott then revealed the fact that Blavatsky and Bloomfield-Moore were on friendly terms for Blavatsky met Bloomsfield-Moore a decade later in London, and developed a relation that he describes as a "long subsequent intimate association," during which Blavatsky "deepened the first conviction" by learning more about Keely, after which she simply "sailed away. "

Since Olcott considered Blavatsky's belief in Keely another easy target for her critics, he again vented his dissatisfaction with the whole affair as a bitter footnote, while praising Blavatsky's Isis Unveiled and The Secret Doctrine. This time he left out any information in favor of Keely: "I think she would have felt deeply mortified if she had lived to read the scathing and complete exposure of Keely's fraudulent demonstrations of his 'Inter-Etheric Force,' in her own magazine, the Theosophical Review, of May (1899), after what she had written about it in The Secret Doctrine (p 556-566, first ed.). She knew nothing personally about Keely, taking her impressions and facts at second hand from a friend in Philadelphia—a shareholder in Keely's original company, and from Mrs. Bloom-field-Moore, his enthusiastic disciple and backer;  so, without stopping to test Keely's theories or verify Mrs. Moore's alleged
facts, she flew off on a tangent into a most instructive essay on cosmic forces, and by her unguarded halfendorse-ment of the now-proven charlatan, exposed one more large joint in her armor to the shafts of the sneering enemies." And Olcott concluded: "But what does it matter after all?"

It would take two years for another theosophist, A. Marques, to correct the errors in Olcott's apology, obviously made in a time when a direct answer was apparently needed, since Olcott could have found the answers that justified Blavatsky's opinion in The Secret Doctrine, Marques reasoned: "In the domain of Natural Philosophy, H.P.B.'s positive announcement has proved absolutely correct, namely, that in spite of all his genius, and in spite of his working on the most accurate basis, J.W. Keely, the discoverer of the 'Inter-Etheric Force and Forces,' would fail to make a success of his invention and discoveries. When she wrote, in 1888, the world, especially America, was anxiously awaiting the harnessing of a new power, the so-called 'dynaspheric force,' and its inventor was at the height of his most sanguine expectations for using psychic force and the latent faculties of the super-physical regions of the Ether. Yet H.P.B. boldly asserted that, although Keely was a natural-born occultist or magician, although his theory was perfectly correct and quite on occult lines, yet he would never be allowed (his italics) to perfect his discovery, though with no apparent reason for the failure except, as she stated, that 'the fifth and sixth planes of the Etheric, or Astral Force, will never be permitted (his italics) to serve for purposes of commerce and traffic' (S.D.I. 613), and because the discovery of mis 'terrible sidereal force,' the 'Mash-mak' of the Atlanteans is 'by several thousand—or, shall we say—hundred thousand years too premature' (S.D.I., 615), and liable to bring disaster instead of help to humanity, while 'terrible secrets, untimely discoveries' are often due to the nefarious influence of the 'Brothers of the Shadow' (S.D.III, 488)...And truly, poor Keely, after many more years of unsuccessful efforts—towards the end of which he probably was driven to use trickery in order to make his financial backers wait patiently for the delusive accomplishment which he always felt just within his grasp—had to be buried, branded as an impostor or a fraud, while his only guilt was really to have been born ahead of his time."

In direct reply to Olcott's apology, Marques wrote: "But the curious part of the matter has been that when his failure became patent, and in harmony with H.P.B.'s prediction, her memory was assailed and she was taken to task for the very failure she had announced, while her pupils and friends could find only the lamest apology for her defense (Theosophist, XX, 687), taking her 'mistakes' and of her 'ignorance' of scientific discoveries, when in fact everything she said about Keely was quite correct—the only one who took up the proper justificative argument being Dr. Franz Hartmann (ibid., 764)."

Franz Hartmann (1838-1912), theosophist and author of books on the Rosicrucians, occult symbolism and magic, and close associate of Blavatsky and acquaintance of Bloomfield-Moore, made several statements about Keely. He also met him at least twice. We've already seen Hartmann's sordid medical career, but in the fields of the occult he was more successful. He became president of the German branch of the Theosophical Society in 1896, headquartered in Berlin. In 1902, Rudolf Steiner would become its secretary. Hartmann also wrote Magic, White and Black, published in 1888, a long and curious digression on occult topics such as invisible beings, sound, the fourth dimension, music and harmonies, Akasha, the astral spheres and planes. Hartmann is also said to have founded a highly secret Rosicrucian Order in Switzerland. Like Bulwer-Lytton, it is asserted that he was frightened with the prospect of premature burial.

In 1905, Hartmann founded the Esoteric Order of the Rosicross together with German occultist and cabalist Leopold Engel. Leopold Engel (1858-1931), who called himself a "nature doctor and magnetopath," was obsessed with the order of the Bavarian Illuminati and in 1897 founded his own Order of the Illuminati in the German town of Dresden. In 1906 he published his influential history of the Illuminati order, the Geschichte des Illuminatenordens.

Engel also wrote a very curious novel titled Mallona, the text of which he obtained through the remote viewing of a medium into the Akashic Records. The novel depicts life on the planet "Mallona," which was destroyed through the evil use of stupendous technology, and its remnants now form our asteroid belt. As a strange echo of Bulwer-Lytton's The Coming Race that Engel undoubtedly read—a German translation was available as early as 1874—flying devices are described, and also the usage of "ether-power." The concept of Akasha-chron-icles, so widely dispersed through The Secret Doctrine that was published in a German translation in 1903, prompted Engel to write in Mallona: "It is a known fact that all things which have ever occurred, do not disappear without a trace, but instead are being photographed and kept in the universe. From every occurrence emanate light waves, which travel in the universe. Would one succeed to capture these light waves in another place and collect them in a suitable device, or to deliver them to a receiver, one would be able to recreate...the same image."

In March 1888, Franz Hartmann had a long conversation with Keely and inspected his devices with great interest during one of his visits. Allegedly Hartmann also made a sketch of one of the devices.

Hartmann first heard of Keely years before he actually visited him, years before The Secret Doctrine was printed and years before Bloomfield-Moore tried to hire him to cure his daughter of mental illness. This could mean that Hartmann either learned about Keely through a contemporary newspaper or that, perhaps this is a glimpse of other uncharted channels, possibly of an occult nature through which news about Keely traveled. Hartmann in any case gives no clue, and with this it is unfortunately left open to conjecture.

Hartmann, however, wrote about Keely: "I have taken great interest in him ever since I first heard of him in 1882. I believe that the world is entering into a new era of existence, and will become spiritualized from top to bottom. As gaslight has driven away, in part, the smoky petroleum lamp, and is about to be displaced by electricity, which in the course of time may be supplanted by magnetism, and as the power of steam has caused muscular labor to disappear to a certain extent, and will itself give way before the new vibratory force of Keely, likewise the orthodox medical quackery that now prevails will be dethroned by the employment of the finer forces of nature, such as light, electricity, magnetism, etc. "

In the end Hartmann and Keely fell out, the former claiming that Keely would never be able to "utilize the force in mechanics," but that Keely's mission was "to spiritualize the world instead of advancing its material progress," which would help Marques in his arguments in justifying Blavatsky.

Burgoyne, who coincidentally came through Philadelphia—he had to check past the immigration authorities there while immigrating to America132—echoed Hartmann's earlier hopes, when he wrote that, "Startling discoveries in chemistry, electricity and all the physical sciences will be brought to light. Steam will be superseded by compressed air (gas), electro-magnetism (atomic power) as a motive power."

Not only that, it also demonstrates, since the Theosophical Society and the Brotherhood of Luxor did not get along very well, that a deep-rooted interest in avant- garde technology is to be found across the whole occult spectrum, a topic to which we shall return in the following chapter. Burgoyne's book, which received favorable comments by Hardinge Britten who by now felt a deep hatred for theosophy,134 was distributed in 1897 by a Chicago based esoteric organization, The Progressive Thinker Publishing House. Their advertisement slogan, which was published in the book Ghost Land edited by Hardinge Britten, reads: "Keep your brain vibrating!"

Interestingly, there is another minor connection between the theosophists Olcott, Blavatsky and Keely, a minor triviality or a small coincidence so to speak. Olcott wrote that "One day in the month of July 1874, I was sitting in my law office.. .when it occurred to me that for years I paid no attention to the spiritualist movement  I went
around the corner to a dealer's and bought a copy of Banner of Light.136 Other persons in the Keely history who submitted their writings to this spiritualist periodical published in Boston were the freemasons and spiritualists John Ballou Newbrough and Keely's friend William Colville.

William Wilberforce Juvenal Colville (1859-1917) was a medium; of how he became aware of his talent, two versions exist. Colville claimed that in his very early childhood, his mediumship "originally declared itself." As a child he had a sensation of "information flowing into me. I can only liken my experience to some memorable statements of Swedenborg concerning influx of knowledge into the interiors of human understanding." Colville treated his mediumship as a talent that consisted of three features; one was clairvoyance, the second as "mental enlightenment" or "intellectual illumination" and the third being "the actual predicting of coming events." On May 24, 1874, Colville "experienced the first thrill of consciousness that it was my principal lifework to travel nearly all over the earth, guided by unseen but not unknown inspirers."

History has a more sober opinion on the origins of Colville's mediumship and dryly states that his mediumistic talents were disclosed on May 24, 1874, coincidentally the year that marked Keely's appearance before a general public and just a month before Olcott would go around the corner to buy a copy of Banner of Light. That day, Colville became conscious of a spirit presence during a meeting. Until 1877, he was often found answering questions while unconscious, explaining his unawareness of his physical mediumship. At other times, he asserted that he heard every word he spoke as if it came from strange lips.

Whatever the differences, 1877 would start Colville's career as a lecturer and medium. In the intervening years between 1874 and 1877, he had "many opportunities for witnessing extraordinary phenomena, as I became well acquainted with many prominent spiritualists.  I had many opportunities for sitting in circles with Williams,
Herne, Monck, Eglinton, and other extraordinary mediums, who, at about that time, were either in the inception or at the zenith of their fame." During his investigations, Colville was repeatedly being told that he was "a physical medium." Although he was not aware of this, he did admit that "planchette has worked for me repeatedly and automatic writing has been often with me quite an everyday experience." During the greater part of 1877-1878, Colville was "privileged to investigate the evidences of phenomenal Spiritualism all over England. The most private gatherings were open to me, and I was times without number privileged to sit with the most distinguished mediums."

His first performance as a medium took place in a Masonic hall on March 4, 1877. Apparently he did well, as the newspapers would herald him as "one of the marvels of the nineteenth century." As a consequence he started to tour as a lecturer for nineteen months between March 1877 and October 1878. He went to the United States towards the end of October 1878 and arrived in Boston. On reaching America he discovered that his arrival had been announced in the Banner of Light, "the oldest spiritualistic newspaper in the world" as Colville wrote.

After lectures in Boston, Colville would visit New York, Philadelphia, Chicago and other cities. Like Randolph, Newbrough and Leland, he travelled to various places and countries. In 1883, he would once again go to England, to return to the United States a year later. In 1885, he revisited England and a year later visited California for the first time. He joined the Theosophical Society in 1890.

In 1895 after a 10 year stay, he would once again visit England and Europe. In 1897, he held private midnight seances with a group of "several professionals." This group assembled twice a week at midnight. Their chief focus of attraction was, as that of Bulwer-Lytton and Disraeli once had been, a "huge crystal placed in the center of a large library table. The crystal was as large as an ordinary globe for containing goldfish, and into this brilliant object we all quietly but intently gazed."

Colville not only co-edited The Gnostic, in which Dowd's "Rosicrucian Temple" was serialized, he also wrote profusely. His writings number over 125 publications, but with his Dashed Against the Rock, he left us his documentation of what must have been a series of remarkable conversations with Keely. When Keely died, Colville delivered a speech during the funeral services and gave a lecture titled: "In Memorial, John W. Keely." He also wrote the memorial address that was held on November 27, 1898, in Casino Hall, Thirteenth Street and Girard Avenue in Philadelphia, where he also gave his lecture on Keely the same month. The memorial address was published in 1899 by the Banner of Light Publishing Co. In it, Colville wrote that "Keely has been well looked upon as the fulfiller of many mysterious predictions. There are those among theosophists and others who have not hesitated to say that he was a soul embodied for a very special purpose; that he came to earth by direction of those mysterious masters who are called Mahatmas in the Sanskrit tongue, that he might give openly to this generation a secret which has been held in the keeping of a few especially illumined ones from times immemorial. It has also been said that, in consequence of the unpreparedness of the populace—in consequence of the lack of spirituality on the part of the great people everywhere, that obstacles have been thrown in Keely's way, even by the very spiritual messengers whose servant and representative he was."

Unfortunately in both Colville's book and written speech there is a general lack of biographical details concerning their association. When, where and under what circumstances Colville met Keely is thus open to conjecture. Possibly Colville became acquainted with Keely as early as 1878, when he lectured in Boston, or around 1888, when Bloomfield-Moore's Keely's Secrets and Blavat-sky's The Secret Doctrine were published, or in 1890 when he joined the Theosophical Society. The interest of a spiritualist and a medium in an inventor was possibly fueled by the ambiguous views of Keely that the theosophists shared. On one hand, Keely was considered as someone who rediscovered the fabulous powers and forces of the ancients - on the other hand, he was considered a person with special psychic capabilities.

Colville wrote profusely on a variety of subjects, such as astrology, spiritualism and reincarnation, fashionable subjects considering the occult milieus that he frequented. But his 1894 Dashed Against the Rock—in which we hear Keely speak— is a quite different book with futuristic ideas such as space travel, a theme to which, like Greg, Delisle Hay and Astor, he never returned to in his later writings. In Colville's case this may be explained by the fact that the book was, in all aspects, an account of Keely's visions. In Colville's autobiography, written in 1906, Keely is strangely absent, and Colville is more concerned with the depiction of his career as a medium and other psychic matters. The only impression that he wrote about his association with the inventor was found in his speech: "Keely was a man you could only know if you had a spiritual discernment; you could not get really acquainted with him simply by talking to him. The only way in which you could become familiar with him at all was by sitting down quietly with him and breathing in some of the mental atmosphere which he breathed, and feeling something of the spirit which animated him, then you might realize that you and he were spiritual neighbors."

Undoubtedly, Cheiro felt the same fascination when he visited Keely in 1890. As we have seen, his memoirs are highly inaccurate. He could have conceived to do so either on the instigation of Stead or Blavatsky, whom he met once, or indeed after visiting Bloomfield-Moore's London home. Perhaps a hint is to be found in one of his writings: "Is there a connection between music and communion with the dead?" he wonders.143 Cheiro was a fanciful pseudonym appropriately chosen to name his profession; for the name was chosen by Count Louis Hamon (1866-1936), the most famous palmist or chiromancer of his time.

Conventional history depicts Cheiro, who asserts that he never was "a member of any Spiritualistic Society, or any sect dealing with Psychic matters" and refused to become a member of the theosophical society when Blavatsky asked him to join,145 more or less as a charlatan, although it is admitted that "it appears from the stories of many of his clients that his predictions were remarkably accurate."

What Cheiro read in Keely's handpalm and what he concluded from what he detected is open to speculation. But his visit left a lasting impression on Cheiro, so much that he felt the need to record his experiences twice. His memoirs about his visit are lacking in accuracy. In another book, he wrote about his visit several times, but in heavy fictionalized form. In one of his short stories, Cheiro meets a person only vaguely described as "a London recluse," who explains to him that "he believed the law of vibration was the key to unlock the secrets of 'the beyond,'" but not only that: "In my investigations I have discovered certain chords of music that create the class of vibration necessary for the manifestation of still higher beings who inhabit what is miscalled the 'invisible world.'.. .I have discovered that certain chords create the class of vibration necessary for still more important manifestations." And echoing Blavatsky's statement with which chapter 1 opened: "the faintest chord of harmony produces its counter wave in endless space until like two affinities they blend together and reappear in greater strength (his italics)."

Cheiro returned to this theme in another short story titled, "Turning Back the Clock of Time." Where Colville named Keely "Aldebaran," in Cheiro's short story Keely was now called "the Mystic" and the location was again shifted from Philadelphia to London. While certain passages such as those that describe the appliance of neon- lamps suggest that perhaps the Mystic was a fictional composite of both Keely and Tesla, we may deduct from passages in Cheiro's tale that he definitely meant Keely; "I had known from the first that he had mastered the most difficult problems of what may be called 'etheric electric waves,' and long before broadcasting receivers had been thought of, he had fitted up in his house a receptacle that collected both sound and speech from the ether, far beyond anything we have at the present day.148 As a demonstration of the theory that the Law of Vibration was the key by which he could utilize some of the great forces of Nature, he could at any moment, by a chord of music on the organ, piano or harp, call whatever lamp he wished into action, or extinguish any or all of them in a similar manner. It is only the vibration and speed of
the revolving molecules that hold the particles of iron, stone, or any other solid mass in a state of solidity  This man in his work had demonstrated that human life itself was
only a matter of vibration. Thus, the Mystic was able to let a person leave his or her body 'for a certain time' by slowing down 'life's responsive throb to such an extent that the sub-conscious brain found its freedom.'"

We further learn that the Mystic had "by another invention...utilized the electricity in the higher atmosphere, and collected it by storage batteries of enormous dimensions, and these, connected with vacuum glass tubes filled with 'neon' or some other gas, produced a light that appeared to flood every part of a room in which one of these lamps was placed."

The Mystic was also able to control "electric forces that he was able not only to dissolve any metal, but he could direct the 'ions' of the dissolving metal into any organ or part of the body that he so desired."151 Through this control the Mystic was able to cause electric currents to carry "ions" of copper, silver, gold or mercury into the body and cure many a disease. More wonders Cheiro encountered during a visit at the abode of the Mystic; a device called "register of Thought," the "delicately poised needle in this wonderfully constructed instrument" would be "affected by the aura or soul radiation of any person standing within a few feet of it and recorded by its movements the effect of thoughts passing through the brain."

Cheiro also asserts that such a device was actually satisfactorily tested in England in August 1897. A fascinating prospect unfolds about one of Keely's devices being shipped to England, but we must not forget that Cheiro's memoirs lack in accuracy, and this time by choosing fiction as his form he presents us with an equally suspicious account dating it seven years after his visit with Keely. Very much in the realms of fiction is his description of a device built for the occasion, although one cannot help but think of the unexplained metal rod that was found dangling from the ceiling of Keely's workshop: "Near the window (was) a curious-looking couch covered with copper, insulated with glass feet...At the head of it lay a compass showing by the position of the needle that the couch lay north to south in a direct line with the magnetic current. On a table at the side I noticed a helmet of copper with a copper band so constructed to go down the spine, with two arms from it to go round the body and terminate in a twelve-pointed magnet on the solar plexus. Connected to the center of the helmet an insulated covered wire led through the open windows to a series of copper wires hanging from the edge of the high roof to a few feet from the ground. These in their turn were joined to an aerial of immense height over the house.. .the copper plate on which my feet would rest was connected with a wire which, passing through what he called 'a magnifier' at the other end of the room, terminated in an 'earth' zinc pole at the bottom of a well in the garden." In other words, "it was intended that my brain should be exactly like the receiver in a 'wireless set'" (his italics).

Where Hartmann's occult companion Engel in his Mallona proposed the idea of capturing light waves that emanated "from every occurrence" in "a receiver" or "a suitable device" to "recreate the same image"—thus in fact watching into the Akasha chronicles— in Cheiro's tale the Mystic has actually built such a device. The apparatus, helmet, magnet and all is specifically made for that purpose the Mystic explains. "Science has proved that the light of some of our distant stars commenced its journey to the earth when it was 'without form and void.' .. .That light reached this world, perhaps yesterday, after traveling thousands and thousands of years from some far-off star. What, then, if its photographic beams could be reversed and the scenes of long past ages could be reconstructed before our eyes. There is nothing lost—there is nothing impossible. Let us make the attempt."

Cheiro bravely climbs on the couch, fastens the helmet on his head, places the curiously shaped magnet on his chest and "the Mystic" plays "a series of chords" on the organ. "The vacuum lamps responded, the lights changed and flooded the room with a pale gray shade like that of a ghostly dawn.. .The music ceased. I could see in the weird gray light the figure of the Mystic leaning over the keys, waiting and listening (his italics). A slight vibration came down the aerial leads, passed through my body and echoed back through the magnifier at the end of the room",155 and the palmist is transported to the lost kingdom of Atlantis moments before its destruction. The Atlanteans take the destruction of their magnificent empire, the "highest pinnacle, greater intelligence can not be created, more knowledge cannot be attained," stoically, for "Men have become as gods, and being as gods, they bend their heads to Destiny."

Hartmann's visit did not leave a lasting impression on him or Keely. We can only speculate about the nature of Hinton's aid. There were Colville's account of Keely's visionary ideas and Cheiro's distorted and fictionalized reminiscences. There was another occult contact however, who was relevant to Keely's research. This contact involved Seth Pancoast, one of the founding members of the Theosophical Society. Like Bloomfield-Moore, Pancoast is almost completely forgotten and is sadly absent in most studies of occult history. In contrast to Hartmann his knowledge of the occult was superior, as he was one of the most learned cabalists of his time.

In 1895, a contemporary newspaper remarked that Bloomfield-Moore made a statement that was "of interest as showing one of the sources of Keely's inspiration in the pursuit of his investigation." At that time she confided to a reporter that, "To the fruits of the thirty years of research which our late townsman, Dr. Seth Pancoast, devoted to the study of the Hebrew Kabbala and to occult science, Mr. Keely is indebted for the instruction which has enabled him to fasten his machinery to the very wheelworks of nature, drawing from space a current of force and demonstrating by dynamic apparatus that it is the governing or controlling force of the universe. "158 To theosophists this was not exactly new. In 1888 Bloomfield-Moore was already writing about similarities in the lines of thought of Keely and Pancoast.

Seth Pancoast (1823-1889) spent the first few years of his adult life in business, but when he was twenty-seven years, he began the study of medicine at the University of Pennsylvania. The year after his graduation as MD in 1852, he became professor of anatomy in the Female Medical College of Pennsylvania. At the end of the year he resigned to become professor of anatomy in the Pennsylvania Medical College. In 1859, he became professor emeritus. He held a private practice and taught at the college until 1865. At that time he interested himself in cabalistic literature. In this field, he became a noted scholar and built up what allegedly was to become the largest library of books dealing with the occult sciences ever assembled in America.

The ideas gleaned from his cabalistic studies curiously mingled with his medical and scientific knowledge, which led him to write a number of extraordinary books. The first of these was The Kabbala; or the True Science of Light; an Introduction to the Philosophy and Theosophy of the Ancient Sages, published in 1877, two years after his involvement in the foundation of the Theosophical Society. This book is said to be the first book ever written in the English language that tried to explain the Ten Sephiroth and give the mystical interpretation of the Holy Scriptures as contained therein.

Pancoast's treatise on the cabbala was republished the same year under the title Blue and Red Light; or, Light and Its Rays as Medicine; Showing that Light is the Original and Sole Source of Life, as it is the Source of All the Physical and Vital Forces of Nature, and that Light is Nature's Own and Only Remedy for Disease, and Explaining How to Apply the Red and Blue Rays in curing the Sick and Feeble. While its title suggests a new therapeutic idea, the book is a cabalistic writing in which mystery, science, religion, and medicine are blended.

It is asserted that Pancoast was not only learned in the cabala and the theory of magic, but was also alchemically inclined and a practicing color therapist which is clearly demonstrated by the titles of his treatise.

In 1875, before the founding of the Theosophical Society, Pancoast unsuc- cessfully tried to cure a leg injury that Blavatsky suffered while falling down the pavement.

Pancoast's philosophies were in the same vein as those of E. Babbitt, who in 1878 privately published his classic study on the therapeutic value of colors and the etheric forces, titled Principles of Light and Colour; Including the Harmonic Laws of the Universe, the Etheric—Atomic Philosophy of Force, Chromo Therapeutics & the General Philosophy of the Fine Forces, Together with Numer. Discoveries & Practical Applications.

There is some circumstantial evidence that the learned Pancoast wrote more than was every published. Some years after his death, his son wrote to Bloom-field-Moore. She stated that she received a letter from "the son of Dr. Seth Pancoast, author of the True Science of Light, whose manuscript works I tried to buy from his widow after the death of Dr. Pancoast in 1889. She refused to sell them then; but the son wrote to offer them to me in order to raise money for his collegiate course. I could not have encouraged him to hope from any assistance from me, in anyway, as I am not well enough to undertake the editing of them, but I at once referred him to Dr. Lounders after hearing from the doctor that he would revise and edit the work, if it proved to be what I had reason to think it was."

It would be another highly influential occultist however, who publicly became involved with the Keely mystery long after those fateful events and long after most of these intriguing people faded from the pages of history. His statements provided alternative answers to the questions that have transformed the Keely history into the Keely mystery; questions such as why Keely's devices are now so strangely missing? What happened to his manuscripts? And why Keely was silenced and his inventions rigorously suppressed?

Rudolf Steiner (1861-1925) started his esoteric career in the Theosophical Society but referred to Keely more than once in his writings and lectures. After he joined the Theosophists, he drifted amongst others to the Ordo Templi Orientis for a number of years before he founded his Anthroposophical movement in 1912.


Steiner obviously learned about Keely through Blavatsky's writings, as so many did, or through Hartmann's statements whom he met.

The occultists and those in favor of Steiner considered—and still consider— him as a high initiate who was able to cross the barriers of space and time and could see the past, and even into the future. Steiner was aware of his capabilities early in his childhood. His Anthroposophy was to him the road to knowledge that would lead the spiritual part of mankind to the spiritual realms of the universe. The aim was to acknowledge its spiritual contents in the whole of creation.

Steiner also believed that man consists of four parts: as a physical body, as an ethereal being, as an astral body, and as ego; and that a close cooperation exists between the physical and the spiritual parts of both man and the universe.

Olcott hastily tried to rupture any connections between Keely and Blavatsky after Keely's alleged exposure, a situation that would be corrected several years later. Significantly Steiner instead began to lecture about Keely long after Keely's alleged exposure. The first recorded lecture in which he mentioned Keely was on March 30, 1905. He also referred to him during two lectures held in 1906, during three lectures in 1916 and again during a lecture in 1920.165 It must be taken into account that Steiner held a great number of lectures, more than 6,000, which limits the times that he choose to speak about him to a rather insignificant proportion.

Moreover, the interpreters of Steiner's words on an occult level have satisfied themselves with the explanation that Steiner incorporated Keely in his grandiose vision on human evolution and the future of mankind—as Steiner did with Bulwer-Lytton— and that he wanted to say that the time was not right for Keely's inventions to be of benefit to mankind. If that is the case, Steiner merely echoed the opinions of Colville, Hartmann, Harte and Blavatsky. For Harte wrote in 1888, a short time before The Secret Doctrine was published, "Whether Keely's inventions will be a commercial success at present is another matter. The force, or, rather forces, which Keely handles, are the same as those known under other names in Occultism, and it is the belief of Occultists that these forces cannot be introduced into the practical life of men, or fully understood by the uninitiated, until the world is fit to receive them with benefit to itself—until the balance of the good and the evil they would work is decidedly on the side of the good.  The discoveries of Keely have an occult side, which perhaps he
himself may not fully perceive."

Blavatsky would later write that "whenever such individuals as the discoverer of the eteric force—John Worrell Keely—men with peculiar psychic and mental capacities are born, they are generally and more frequently helped than allowed to go unassisted. ...Only they are helped on the condition that they should not become, whether consciously or unconsciously, an additional peril to their age."

Notwithstanding his opinion of Keely, which is in part based upon the opinions of the theosophists, Steiner spread the information about Keely in anthropsophical circles. Thus only recently references to Keely have been unearthed in the notes of Walter Johannes Stein, a remarkable anthroposophist, writer of an erudite grail-study, and the protagonist of Trevor Ravencroft's Spear of Destiny, written in the same manner as Bulwer-Lytton once wrote his Zanoni and The Coming Race. Stein also learned about the Keely motor from another source: "Mr. Dunlop told me that he saw the Keely motor, but he did not see it function." Interestingly, Stein remarks that this occurred before "the world at first learned more of this case through Madame Blavatsky." Guenther Wachsmuth, who translated The Coming Race, was so taken by Steiner's remarks that he promptly wrote his book on the forces of the ether.

Three of Steiner's accomplishments set himself distinctly apart from the theosophical thoughts on Keely. These accomplishments, most important in the Keely history, are the construction of what has been called "The Strader Instruments," of which a full expose is given in chapter 11; the performance of Steiner's Mystery Plays in Munich in 1912 for which the Strader Instruments were meant; and a series of lectures during which he discussed Keely and his inventions. Steiner also modeled the figure of Dr. Strader partly on Keely in his Four Mystery Plays, published in 1912.173 In the third part, Dr. Strader invented a device that operates on the fusion of vibrations. Through this device, mankind will be freed of toilsome labor and the use of expensive energy. Mankind, Steiner reasons in his Four Mystery Plays, would have all the time for self-tuition and spiritual development. But Strader was not to complete his remarkable device. In the fourth part of the Four Mystery Plays he dies while his device is still in the laboratory phase.

In 1918, Steiner gave six lectures, one of which is most interesting in connection to the Keely mystery. During this particular lecture, held on December 1, and titled "The Mechanical, Eugenic and Hygienic Point of View of the Future," Steiner explained that mankind would develop three new faculties during the next centuries. This would happen in the same natural way as mankind's mental faculties had been developed during the past. These three new faculties would be the new mechanical faculty, the new hygienic faculty and the new eugenic faculty. Steiner believed that especially the English and the Americans would develop the new mechanical faculty. New machines and mechanistic devices would be the result. These would operate through "the laws of the fusion of vibrations."

He also confided to his audience that indeed there existed secret societies. But he did not mean orders such as the Golden Dawn, the Hermetic Brotherhood of Luxor, the Freemasons, the Rosicrucians, the Ordo Templi Orientis or the Theosophists. These orders, while being secretive and surrounding themselves with an aura of mystique, were never secret in a strict sense.

Steiner made it quite clear that he did not mean any of these occult orders. He had been initiated in most of these orders and he was honest enough to admit that this secretiveness that was also apparent with his Anthroposophical Society was nothing more than a relic from the early days of theosophy. At that time it merely served to provide the society with a "special distinction."

We could easily dismiss Steiner's statements as pure allegations typical of an occultist, eager to clothe himself with a supposedly profound occult knowledge. But the fact that Steiner saw most of the 19th century occult orders from the inside gives food for thought. Was he simply trying to impress his audiences? This we will probably never know, because as Disraeli in his novels and speeches and Bulwer-Lytton in his letter to Hargrave Jennings before him, Steiner never really bothered to identify these mysterious secret societies. During his lecture he only confided that these societies existed in the English-speaking countries and were "sources through which, by certain methods of which I perhaps one day will speak...truths may be begotten according to which one may rule things politically."

He also stated that, "In the denial to others of a certain kind of occult knowledge, that is being cherished in these centers, lies an immense power." This knowledge was strictly reserved only for those mysterious secret circles, for according to Steiner this was "the only way by which it is possible to attain world domination."

These secret societies plotted, according to Steiner, to conquer the entire east "that begins with the river Rhine and continues further east to Asia," and to establish a caste of rulers in the West and a caste of slaves in the East,179 thereby morbidly foreshadowing Hitler's own plans, partially based on occult concepts, that would plunge the world in a black abyss of horror, pain and sorrow.

He also told that the initiates of "English secret societies" very well knew that "through the use of certain abilities, which are until now hidden from mankind, but which develop themselves through the law of resonance, machines and other mechanical contrivances could be set in motion." Then Steiner exposed a bit of the deeper meaning of his Mystery Plays: "You can find a hint in that which I have brought in connection with the person of Strader in my Mystery Plays." With this Steiner of course meant a device that he had developed and that is known as his mysterious "Strader Instruments."

But he also delivered a most puzzling statement: "These things are today in development." What did Steiner mean? Was he just adding a little atmosphere, an aura of mystique to his lecture, was he drawing on the reservoir of occult legend and hearsay, or was he hinting at the fact that somewhere, in total secrecy an unknown group was constructing avant-garde technology along the lines of Keely's discoveries? 

Calling the fact that so much of Keely's legacy is now missing, perhaps what Steiner further said to his audience obtains an ominous meaning. Echoing Blavatsky who wrote that, "It is just because Keely's discovery would lead to a knowledge of one of the most occult secrets, a secret which can never be allowed to fall into the hands of the masses," Steiner continued with a grave warning: "These affairs are being guarded as a secret in those circles on the subject of material occultism. There are engines possible, that, because one knows its vibrational curve, can be set in motion through a very small human influence. ...But they will, when that which I call mechanical occultism will be put in practice, which is an ideal of these secret circles, deliver not only an equivalent of five- or six hundred million in human labor, but they will achieve about one thousand million in human labor. Therefore nine tenths of the human labor of the English speaking populace will be superfluous. But mechanical occultism will not only make nine tenths of the labors... superfluous, it will also make it possible to paralyze every rebellion of the unsatisfied masses. The ability to set engines in motion according to the law of resonance with harmonious vibrations, will develop itself with the English speaking populace. Of this, those secret societies are well aware. On this they count when they will attain the dominance over the entire population of the earth."

Steiner's allegations may have the ringing of some actual, unnerving truth. Perhaps for this he had his reasons to warn, yet to speak in vague allusions and riddles. For only after closer examination some people who were involved in the Keely history reveal their shadowy alliance or association with what might be just another college fraternity, one is obliged to join out of social habit and tradition when undertaking a study at a university, but of which it is asserted to be one of the most powerful, dangerous secret societies of the last century: the chapter of the order Skull & Bones. This society does not seem to have overt occult or esoteric overtones, but instead seems to be a breeding ground for illuminated politics.

The society was founded at Yale University in 1833 by General William Huntington Russell and Alphonso Taft, after Russell obtained a charter to do so from an unnamed German Society. The chapter exists even today and is outwardly modeled on a Masonic institution; thus it uses the number 322 to denote itself. It uses the symbol of the skull and crossbones and its members undergo initiatory rituals.182 Possibly the chapter of the Skull & Bones order was a continuation of the Pi Beta Kappa lodge that is said to have been imported by Benjamin Franklin from France in 1776.

Dr. Brinton, who at one time witnessed one of Keely's experiments and who translated Keely's terms in a comprehensible list, was a member of the Scroll & Key society, a group that revolved around the chapter of the order Skull & Bones, and was founded at Yale a few years after the Skull & Bones chapter was founded. Wayne MacVeigh, at one time Keely's lawyer, whose "dexterous move" was instrumental in releasing Keely from jail in 1888, studied at Yale. It was he who made "a brilliant speech...for the resuscitation of the Brothers and Linonia." The English equivalent of the Skull & Bones is referred to as "The Group," and although John Jacob Astor's name does not crop up, it is asserted that "The Astor name is prominent in "The Group' in England, but not in the Order in the U.S. "

The most unsettling thing is that outwardly these persons seemed to have aided Keely. The question thus remains open as to whether or not these persons, members of either sinister groups—or in fact innocent college fraternities—revolving around or having to do with the Skull & Bones, were indeed involved in a complex scheme or shadowy machinations, and whether or not they were in league with, or instead quite against the unknowing Keely.