# 动力千年：基利的最后几年 

4 The Power Millennium Keely's Last Years

"The dawn of a new revelation has already begun to shed its light which will show to the nations that pure science is true religion and the one sympathetic association with Deity. "
John Keely in a letter to Clara Bloomfield-Moore
dated May 30, 1894

"Tesla has reached out almost to the crest of the harmonic wave, leaving all electrical explorers far behind him. "

Clara Bloomfield-Moore Keely and his Discoveries, Aerial Navigation, 1893 From 1895 until the end of his life, Keely would find himself in one of the strangest, most complex and most significant of late 19th and early 20th century history. While he quietly struggled to master his discoveries, many foundations were shaped around him that would influence the course of history. Science, in the exploits of Keely's contemporary Tesla, made enormous leaps. Occultism rose once again, and with it, numerous esoteric and hermetic societies appeared on the surface. Keely was steadfastly working on his engine that would enable an airship and possibly even a spaceship to fly as proposed in Colville's and Astor's books. And as a haunting echo of his dreams, the years 1896 and 1897 would witness an inexplicable wave of what was referred to as airships crossing the skies over large parts of the U.S

The year 1895, with Keely laboring day after day to perfect his inventions and to master his discovery, was the year that public interest would be renewed in his work. The year began uncertainly enough. In January, the U.S. government was on the very brink of bankruptcy. Through the financial scheming of J. Pierpont Morgan, one of Tesla's financiers, and with the help of August Delmont, a wealthy businessman, Morgan was able to secure $60 million in foreign gold reserves, thus saving the country from total bankruptcy. This incident also created a significant shift of power; it marked the rise of Morgan, also known as "the octopus" since he had a hand in almost every American industrial branch, as "the king of Wall Street."1 The year 1895 would also see the smoldering beginnings of what would eventually become the Spanish-American War.

In February, Keely submitted two circulars amongst the stockholders. In the first circular, he explained that, "It is well known that during the period of research and discovery, which has consumed about twenty-two years, I have on many occasions imagined I had neared the end of my work, and under the influence of this thought, or for the purpose of helping me over some unforeseen obstacles, I have entered into so many obligations that at the present time, even assuming that I am right now in thinking I am at the end or near enough the end of my researches to take action looking to a practical development of my system, it would be impossible for me to deliver to the world this system, in the shape of property of any commercial value, until I have positive knowledge of the character and amount of all the outstanding obligations against me. To obtain this knowledge is now the first step to be taken, before I can even offer my work for the inspection of those who may be selected to determine the soundness of my present belief in my ability to produce and deliver a commercially valuable system of Vibratory Physics."

Possibly the compelling episode a month before, in which the U.S. found itself on the brink of bankruptcy, reverberated Shockwaves among those who had financial interests in the Keely Motor Company, and thereby Keely was approached with questions and feelings of uncertainty, which prompted him to write his circulars. He continued by stating that, "...for until such disclosure of interests, claims or obligations is complete, further development of my enterprise under them is absolutely impossible."

He therefore decided to have all obligations registered by the Citizen's Trust and Surety Company of Philadelphia. The registration should take the form of "an exchange of the obligation for the Trust Company's receipt for the same; this receipt to contain a detailed description of the obligation deposited, and to carry with it a contract to return the original obligation to the owner or his assigns, at the expiration of a time to be set forth; or such equivalent obligation of a new organization as may be acceptable in full cancellation of the original claim." The circular ended by stating that persons could obtain blanks for filling out and attaching to the original obligation by writing to Keely.

It is possible that Keely was also approached by the directors of the Keely Motor Company, who must have felt something of the threatening U.S. bankruptcy, and who wanted assurances from him. But his dissatisfaction with how business affairs were handled by the Keely Motor Company, plaguing him with court proceedings and harassing him with unreasonable demands, prompted him to establish a new company. In the second circular, Keely wrote: "...I also find the obligations entered into while I was yet groping after light in my work are impossible of execution, because they have no intelligent bearing on as it now stands; and so, in order to establish a commercial value to my former work, these old speculative obligations must be avoided entirely. I believe I am now able to produce a thoroughly practical commercial engine for the use of the force in all railways, and I wish to make such engine the basis for the organization of an entirely new company, capitalized in such a way as to enable me to accomplish something practical and of commercial value.... I propose to sell to the new company all rights for the whole world (exclusive of the territory covered by the 'Pacific Slope Concession' and the Philadelphia Manufacturing Company's contracts) in the use of the engine above mentioned. The price for this is to be the entire capital stock of the new company."

Furthermore, after the sale, Keely would return to the treasury of the newly formed company three-tenths of the capital stock, which would be divided in two-tenths "to be used to cancel all outstanding obligations," the other one-tenth "to be used to raise the working capital necessary to develop the property of the company." Seven-tenths would be kept by Keely. He would also set aside the equivalent of 51 one-hundredths of the entire capital stock "for my personal account and voting power, for a period of five years, so that it cannot be sold or given away by me during that period."

This was all necessary, explained Keely in the second circular, "to give me voting control of the company until it shall have been thoroughly established in the development of its rights under control of the engine before mentioned, and at the expiring of the trust I am to have absolute control of the capital stock covered by the same."

Obviously Keely had discussed his plans for the formation of a new company with his supporter, Bloomfield-Moore, for under the second version of his circular she submitted a short notice, written under her nom-de-plume, H.O. Ward. In it she approved of his proposed scheme, writing that "it in no way violates the contract made with me by Mr. Keely on the 12th of April, 1890." She also urged the members of the Board to "accept Mr. Keely's terms as set down in circulars nos. I and II.. .as there then need be no further delay from want of that cooperation which now not only jeopardizes all commercial interests in Mr. Keely's inventions, but the interests and advancement of science in the long delayed announcements of the value of his great discoveries."4 While this gave the Board of Directors certainly something to ponder upon, another unexpected occurrence took place several months later.

On November 6, 1895, a newspaper wrote how interest in what was by now called the "Keely motor mystery" had again "been aroused," the reason being a published statement that a group of "New York capitalists" had become interested in Keely's inventions. But somehow, perhaps as an aftermath of his circular, or as a herald of the following year's coming events, a large part of the article was devoted to Bloomfield- Moore's dealings with Keely. And from it, we learn more about the nature of the agreement. While she had helped him from 1881 on, she apparently made an agreement with him in 1890.5 This agreement to which Keely was bound was that he must not attempt to build or construct an engine to


"demonstrate in a practical way the value of his discovery, until he had entirely mastered the principles which lay at the bottom of it." Perhaps this would somehow explain the installments that Keely had made over the years.

But the term of this agreement was now drawing to a close, and for the past few months Keely "has been preparing to make a practical demonstration of his vibratory system, which is different from the one which he first discovered and abandoned because he could find no means of controlling the force."

This did not mean that Bloomfield-Moore disposed of her interest, instead her "chief anxiety" was that someone other than Keely would possess his secret, and that it might not "die with him before the apparatus for utilizing the newly-discovered force shall have been patented." In her view, until such patents were issued, the stock of the Keely Motor Company would only have "speculative value." Bloomfield-Moore also "removed the restriction" from Keely, who would "soon commence the construction of a railway traction engine," the plan of which he had set forth in his February circular. "The researches being concluded, he says he can now devote his energies to the utilization of this hitherto unknown force."

The New York capitalists who so expressed their interest in Keely visited and talked with him and were "favorably impressed with what they saw," so they would "probably become financially interested as well in the Keely enterprise." And a mighty group this was: the puissant rich John Jacob Astor; William K. Vanderbilt; William Cullen Brewster, president of the Fifth Avenue Trust Company; and other unidentified New York millionaires.8 Astor had already purchased a large interest in the Keely motor "from a person who for some years had been an enthusiastic advocate of Mr. Keely."

Never before was Keely approached by such an extremely wealthy group, and the news of the group traveled far and wide. One of Tesla's acquaintances wrote an alarming letter to Tesla, expressing his "astonishment at Astor's gullibility" in investing money in Keely's discoveries.10 The reason for this alarm was that Tesla himself was trying to obtain funds from Astor.

The news also reached the directors of the Keely Motor Company. They responded by "proposing some sort of settlement of the business questions existing between the company on the one hand and Mr. Keely and his patroness, Mrs. Bloomfield-Moore, on the other," very likely also meaning the announcement in February of Keely's plans to establish a new company. Bloomfield-Moore rejected their propositions and stayed "in negotiations with Mr. Astor and other New York capitalists."
Nothing came of it however. "The negotiations that have been pending for some time between John Jacob Astor, William K. Vanderbilt, William Cullen Brewster and other New York millionaires, Mrs. Bloomfield-Moore and Keely for the control of Mrs. Moore's interest in the Keely motor have come to an end. At a conference in this city on Thursday, at which were present Mrs. Bloomfield-Moore, John Jacob Astor, William Cullen Brewster, J.K. Lorrimer, H.O. Ward and others, the question of organizing a Keely Power Company, to bring out Keely's invention when complete, was discussed."

One of the conditions of the wealthy New Yorkers was that Keely would move to New York. There the millionaires would "erect for him a new building and back him to the extent of several millions." The proposition was rejected, because neither Bloomfield-Moore nor Keely "would consent to the latter going to New York." Furthermore, both rejected the idea of forming a new company until a demonstration had been given of "certain operations of the invention." Another reason was that Bloomfield-Moore and Keely wanted to prevent speculation in Keely stock until the inventor had completed a patentable machine."

One of the reasons for Keely and Bloomfield-Moore's rejection of the proposition of Keely moving to New York might have been that they had the chilling thought fresh in mind of Tesla's New York laboratory that had mysteriously burned to the ground in March of the same year.12 The incident was widely noted in the press. Probably Bloomfield-Moore learned more of this disastrous incident first hand. She had been aware of Tesla's work since at least 1893. She also corresponded with Tesla on several occasions and met with him at least once, although in Tesla's letters to her that have survived there is no mention of the fire that destroyed his laboratory and many years of work. But from his letters we learn that he studied Keely's theories and was aware of the inventor from Philadelphia, although largely from a distance.

Thus towards the end of the year before, Tesla wrote to her in a letter that, "I sincerely wish that I would share your opinion about Keely and his works. That he has ingenuity and skill in experimenting I will readily believe. But his method is an unscientific one and his exposition is wanting in the extreme. It is painful to read his theories. Can he have recognized something and yet be utterly incapable of expressing it? This seems impossible for there is no truth which cannot be told in simple language. The best I can do after all I have heard of him from Mr. Theodore Puskas,13 Mr. Andrews and others who have been thrown in close contact with Keely is to say that I pity him. I devotedly wish that you may be spared the pain of deception. The solution will eventually come but from other quarters. I myself am only one of many, who believe to have found a way and who strive and hope to accomplish...of your esteem. Please take care of your health and guard yourself against influences which can only result in a disadvantage to you."

Tesla's harsh criticism on Keely's methodology did not cool Bloomfield-Moore's relationship with Tesla; why not see for himself instead of forming an opinion based on second-hand comments and the reading of Keely's visionary prose? So she invited him to come to Keely's workshop. A month after the fire that destroyed his laboratory, with Tesla obviously having other things on his mind, he replied to her in writing concerning her invitation: "I could not have accepted your invitation (to witness Keely's demonstrations) nor express myself in regard to Keely, but I wish to assure you sincerely that I would be very pleased to comply with your wishes in any other way. You are evidently following a noble and generous impulse in defending Keely, and I only wish that he would be worthy about your duties to yourself. You must not sacrifice your own welfare for others whomever they may be."

And like Edison who had rejected an invitation some 17 years before him, Tesla would also never meet Keely. Notwithstanding Tesla's evasive maneuvers towards Keely, he felt different for Bloomfield-Moore, as his correspondence continued in the warmest of tones: "You are a noble-hearted woman and your evident anxiety makes me feel keener the disappointment of not being able to respond to your invitation. For many years I have been at work on great ideas. I have used scientific methods in the investigations of the problems which I proposed myself to solve and my progress in these fields though very slow was nevertheless sure. Now, after all these efforts in overcoming great obstacles when I have partially reached my dreams I cannot afford to dissipate my energies which many scientific men say are precious for my fellow men."

In a subsequent letter, Tesla further expressed his concern over Bloomfield- Moore's health: "I hope that you will soon free yourself from your obligations here and go abroad as the affairs which you are devoting at present your attention to are certainly telling on your nerves. I regret this the more as I fear that your energies are wasted on a task which is not worthy to mankind as a single hour of your life."

While Tesla never visited Keely, he did come to Philadelphia on a number of occasions - in 1893 when he lectured at the Franklin Institute during which he told the audiences about his visions of the precursor to television,18 and again in May 1895, when he, Edison and Alexander Graham Bell met during the National Electrical Exposition.19 It is not known if Keely attended any of these occasions. Based on the documentation that is at hand, there is no indication that Keely ever mentioned Tesla, or referred to him in either a negative or positive sense.

There is documentary evidence that the same year Tesla visited Bloomfield-Moore in Philadelphia at least on one occasion; on a letter, she scribbled, "After Tesla's visit to me in Philadelphia he wrote." In the letter, Tesla expressed his fascination with Bloomfield-Moore: "I need not assure that I have been deeply touched by your evident kindness for me. Yet, I would wish you were not so, for I feel that I am unfair as my whole soul is wrapped up in the investigation I am pursuing. It has grieved me to be a helpless onlooker on the last occasion for I would have much desired to help you, at least in sound advice. Please remember what I told you about your duties to yourself. You must not sacrifice your own welfare for others whomever they may be. Please take care of your health. You know that at your age one has not a very great receptive power. Your weakness at the moment of my leaving you Sunday evening alarmed me and I reproached myself for having remained so long depriving you of the much needed rest. But I was so interested in you that I forgot my duty. To be frank with you anything concerning Keely has not the faintest interest for me."

The reason for the fact that Tesla so shunned away from a first-hand investigation of Keely's discoveries, while at the same time remaining on friendly terms with Bloomfield-Moore, is not so much found in Tesla's opinion of Keely's work. It was probably tainted by the frustrating fact that he hoped to procure funds from Astor, a seemingly impossible task, whereas with Keely, Astor apparently displayed no such hesitations. Nor is it found, in fact, in the qualities of the discoveries or the visionary and highly original scope of the ideas of either Keely or Tesla.21 The reason is to be found in the enigmatic John Jacob Astor himself, the multimillionaire who eagerly negotiated with Keely and Bloomfield-Moore, while at the same time curiously evading Tesla's requests for financial funding.

John Jacob Astor (1864-1912) was one of the wealthiest men on earth, with assets somewhere around $100 million. By comparison, powerful Morgan, "the king of Wall Street" and one of Tesla's financiers, had amassed a fortune of $30 million.22 John Jacob Astor was not only a multimillionaire and a distant relative of Theodore Roosevelt, but also an inventor with a visionary mind. He is characterized as a somewhat estranged man, a playboy who was dominated by his mother and his wife. He showed early on a talent for things mechanical, and he owned a workshop at Ferncliff, where his vivid imagination played on the possibilities of copper tubing, wires and electric currents. Later he built his own laboratory, in which he produced inventions such as a bicycle brake, a new kind of marine turbine engine, and a machine for removing surface dirt from roads. He was one of the first Americans to own a motor car.23 Another of his inventions, a pneumatic walkway, won a prize at the 1893 Chicago World Fair. Other inventions included a storage battery, an internal combustion engine and a flying machine. One of his dreams was to find a way to create rain by pumping warm air from the surface of the earth into the upper atmosphere, an original idea, but one that the U.S. Patent Office turned down.24 Complex and furtive as Astor was, he also had a reputation for eccentricity; he started writing his cryptic novel A Journey In Other Worlds in 1892, when he was only 28 years old.

The same month that Tesla visited Bloomfield-Moore in Philadelphia, he also met with Astor. He did so, writes Tesla's latest biographer, in his "progress of netting more millionaires,"25 hoping to amass enough funds for his experiments. This uncovers yet another layer of Tesla's disinterest in Keely's work while at the same time keeping a fascination with Bloomfield-Moore, Keely's loyal and ardent supporter. For Bloomfield-Moore not only knew Astor intimately since at least 1882 when they mingled in the highest diplomatic and noble circles in Italy, but she writes that "...the mother of Mr. Astor (had) been a connection of my relatives, the Wollcotts."

One time, Astor visited her to offer her "a paper for the New Scientific Review," Bloomfield-Moore writes, "before he went over to New York for the yacht races...I corrected and sent back my proof—Spiro Vortex Action."

She also mentions one instance when she had been on board the Nourmahal, Astor's steam-driven three-masted schooner that measured an impressive hundred yards and was equipped with four machine-guns to frighten off potential pirates. Bloomfield- Moore wrote about this occasion: "...on Sunday, August 4th, while on board the Nourmahal I agreed to go with Mr. Astor and the electrician who invented the dynamo plates a patent for which he has taken out  Now I can only say
that Mr. Samuels has given up electricity and is going to study Keely's system under Keely's instruction, thoroughly convinced after witnessing the operation of drawing forces from space, the action of the test mediums and the levitation of the weights in the jar."

What, if any, advice Bloomfield-Moore gave Tesla in his hopes of obtaining a funding from Astor, if he ever sought her help in this matter, is not known. Bloomfield-Moore was a highly intelligent and kind-hearted woman, and her conversations with the genius Tesla must have been stimulating and interesting for both of them. In the end, Astor remained elusive and kept his ambiguous attitude towards Tesla. Tesla wrote Astor several letters after Astor met with Keely in Philadelphia, asking him for financial funding29 and inviting him and his wife to visit his laboratory.

In 1899 Astor finally agreed to fund Tesla, but not for his grandiose ideas, nor for a large or generous amount of money. During a meeting the year before the agreement, Tesla painted to Astor the possibilities of his teleautomaton. Astoundingly Astor, who four years before had published his book that also showed no limits in visionary concepts, replied coolly that, "You are taking too many leaps for me. Let us stick to oscillators and cold lights. Let me see some success in the marketplace with these two enterprises, before you go off saving the world with an invention of an entirely different order, and then I will commit more than my good wishes. Stop in again when you have a sound proposal or call me on the telephone."

So when the agreement was made, Tesla was forced to limit himself to oscillators and fluorescent light bulbs, and on January 10, 1899, papers were signed whereby Astor gave Tesla $100,000 for 500 shares of the Tesla Electric Company, a rather insignificant sum compared with the "several millions" with which Astor and others were originally planning to support Keely. Astor was also elected director of the board of the Tesla Electric Company. At the same time, Tesla moved into Astor's hotel, the Waldorf-Astoria.32 Tesla would not exploit his oscillators and fluorescent lights, but went to Colorado Springs instead, to embark upon another of his grandiose projects. After that, their relationship became strained. "Tesla had deceived him," writes Seiffer in his biography. "As wealthy as he was, Astor wanted to invest in a sure thing."

History is left with an uncomfortable mystery. Astor's reluctance to invest in Tesla's most brilliant ideas, and in the end only giving a mere fraction of what he had at his disposal for one of Tesla's lesser inventions, is interpreted as shrewd and keen businessmanship, bent on investing only in what is sure. At the same time Astor was described as being very gullible. His willingness to support Keely with a far greater sum is not understood, since the weight of argument is shifted towards that fraction of Keely's contemporaries who were merely interested in depicting him as a fraud.

But this contradiction in the descriptions of Astor's character and motives fails to explain why he appeared so disinterested in Tesla's visionary ideas, while he himself had published a book overflowing with fantastic technological extrapolations. Or why he, not an entirely unsuccessful inventor himself and having at least some specialized knowledge, at the same time preferred to erect a Keely Power Company and together with other millionaires finance it with several millions, based on Keely's own fantastic discoveries.

Possibly Astor, having invented a flying machine, was more impressed with the prospects of Keely's proposed concepts of aerial navigation than Tesla's futuristic plans, for aerial navigation was a field of invention that concerned Tesla only at random. Aerial navigation also fascinated Astor's acquaintance Bloom-field-Moore. It very likely may have been she who pointed Astor's attention towards Keely's discoveries.

Perhaps Astor was involved in an intricate financial plan, design or intrigue based on division and domination. Whatever his reasons, Astor took these with him to a watery and ice cold grave. After he died in 1912 during the tragic Titanic disaster, only those 500 shares of the Tesla Electric Company were found. In all the years, Astor had never even taken the trouble to increase the stock.

As a side effect of the negotations between Keely, Bloomfield-Moore and Astor and his rich allies, interest in Keely and his discoveries renewed itself somewhat, and the usual interview appeared occasionally in the Philadelphia press. In one of these, a puzzled reporter tried to describe one of Keely's avant-garde devices. "A disk-shaped apparatus was shown, about 18 inches in diameter and two inches thick, covered with brass, and divided into segments. Upon its face were three tuning forks, with heavy tines, two of the same pitch, and the third a half note below. On the lower edge was a small detachable piece of brass, with two small narrow strips of steel fastened to it. A brass cap, like the top of a fruit jar, filled even full with an amalgam paste, which Mr. Keely said he had studied three years to produce, was attracted to these steel strips, and hanging to the cap (or disk as it might be called) was an iron weight of 140 pounds." The reporter also witnessed a levitation experiment, similar to the one Leidy saw, involving disks and metal balls "the size of an orange," held in glass jars filled with water. Keely also confided to the reporter that he expected "to build his railway engine at once and have it ready for operation some time during the next year."35
Yet again, towards the end of 1895, notwithstanding earlier statements that Keely would commence the construction of the railway engine, nothing of any substance was reached. In November, a newspaper wrote that the rumors that Keely would exhibit an engine to "New York capitalists," were not true. "It was learned that no engine has yet been built; that the New York parties will not be here, and that, by particular request Mr. Keely had decided to give no exhibition of any kind at present."

On December 11, the usual annual meeting of the stockholders of the Keely Motor Company was held. A newspaper ironically remarked that this time the meeting would likely "be one of more than usual interest, on account of the reported efforts of well-known capitalists to obtain an interest in Keely's inventions." But the most important reason for this more than unusual interest was that it somehow was discovered that the Keely Motor Company actually had no real basis of existence; "the New York parties who are said to have been looking into the matter have discovered that the Motor Company has no legal claim upon the results of the work that Keely has been engaged on for the last five years." This shattering conclusion was based upon the ground that "the terms of the contract binding Keely to turn over to the Motor Company all the inventions of whatever nature he may make during his life are illegal and cannot be enforced."

If that was the case, the Keely Motor Company was without assets, since no patents were taken out, and no specifications of Keely's devices were ever drawn. "In fact," it continued, "Keely gave up the attempt to harness the power, and directed his investigations to the discovery of a means for utilizing the force which he believes to exist in the vibrations of the universal ether." Keely, however, was "willing to give the old company a minority interest in the new enterprise when formed, not as a matter of legal right," it was pointed out, "but as an equitable adjustment of all matters between him and the company."

In the meantime, Bloomfield-Moore answered a letter to Collier in which she made it clear that no effort was made to buy her share in "the invention of the airship propeller and the railway traction engine."

She furthermore stated that, "had the Keely Motor Company made such a proposition to her, after she had refused theirs, she was "prepared to place her share under their control." But now, she valued her shares "as I never valued them before," although she admitted that she would have given her shares away if "they would have held the gift for the good of the masses, for the progress of humanity, for research in new fields, and not for selfish aggrandizement." An indication of what she must have thought of the true intentions of the Keely Motor Company also lay in her following statement: "Now there is nothing that could induce me to place these privileges in the hands of financiers," and she made a strange remark: "Had the negotiations been completed," she said, "within two weeks the scientific world would be set ablaze by the announcement that their syndicate was to employ apergy instead of electricity as the motive power."

Nothing came of the negotiations between Keely, Bloomfield-Moore and Astor and his allies. In the meantime, Tesla was still in pursuit of the millionaire's support, even though a slight connection between Astor and Keely still remained. The next month, Keely announced that he would impart with some of his learning. He would instruct Zak Samuels, "Astor's expert," who had met Bloomfield-Moore on Astor's imposing ship, "in the taking up of dead lines and in the sensitizing of metal so that it is acted upon by radiation on the same principle as in the human brain." This apparently could not be done immediately; when Keely was ready, he declared, he would "notify Mr. Samuels (who is the only man I will have time to instruct) and this at the earliest possible moment."

On the same day, a far more important statement was issued to the press: a dark herald of the dramatic event that would unfold the following year. But the statement was not only a herald; it was also an indication of what the true cause of that event was. It all began on December 14, when the Philadelphia press got a glimpse of the sordid family affairs of Keely's most loyal supporter; Clara Bloomfield-Moore. Bloomfield-Moore had accused her son, Clarence B. Moore, of having wasted the money of his father's estate of which he had been the sole acting executor since 1878. Of course, Moore denied this: "The answer of Clarence B. Moore, the son of Mrs. Bloomfield-Moore, to her petition to have him dismissed as executor of his father's estate, was filed today by his counsel, C. Berkely Taylor and John G. Johnson." Moore vehemently added: "He denies mismanagement of the estate, tells a detailed story, alleging his mother's persecution of him, and asserts that she is insane."41
But this sudden, poisonous outburst withered away as quickly as it sprung up. Far more urgent affairs were taking place; Bloomfield-Moore, under her nom-de-plume of
H.O. Ward, was giving out long statements to the press regarding what she held was the nature of Keely's discoveries, which somehow hinted to a less passive role for her in her relation with Keely than was generally assumed: "In 1894, when I made the suggestion to Mr. Keely, he began with his first attempts to vibrate hydrogen, with the result that he is now able to show the correctness of my random conjecture."

On Monday, December 11, The Keely Motor Company had its usual chaotic assembly during its first stockholder meeting in five years. During the meeting the "harmonizing of conflicting interests" was attempted and a reorganization was announced. All in all, some fifty people were present in the hall at the southeast corner of Eight and Walnut Streets.

After the election and re-election of company members of the Board, a special three- member committee was appointed, consisting of Collier, treasurer Sylvester Snyder and Lancaster Thomas, vice president of the Keely Motor Company. This team conferred and formulated a plan of reorganization of the company, which was then submitted to Keely. Naturally a part of the plan was that Keely should apply for patents. Ackerman presented his annual report, which in part related that "more than a year ago Keely undertook to instruct his patent attorney, Mr. Charles B. Collier, relative to his inventions, including the sensitizing process, to enable Collier to take out patents. One of the members of the Board, Mr. Lancaster Thomas, was present during the sensitizing of several disks and assisted in its performance, and both gentlemen stated that it was absolutely new." Collier, the report stated, had told the Board that "this as well as Keely's other structures were capable of being protected by letters having the broadest scope known to our patent system."

But one year ago, Keely, "for some reason not known to the Board nor understood by Mr. Collier," ceased all communication with Collier and gave him no further information regarding his inventions. Instead, Keely sent out his two circulars in regard to reorganization of which the Board did not approve. The Board announced that "reorganization would be effected as soon as Keely operates a large commercial engine and enters again into the matter of procuring patents to cover his inventions."

On December 24, almost two weeks later, Bloomfield-Moore made a statement to the press that Keely had abandoned all ideas of patenting his inventions, but that he would adopt a system of royalties for the commercial use of his discoveries. Keely decided upon this course because he was fed up with the delay of the stockholders of the old Keely Motor Company in accepting his terms for a reorganization of interests that he had announced almost a year before.
According to her there were "twenty or thirty instruments to be patented, covering the various branches of the system." Among these she enumerates the "spiro-vibrophonic" which would require eight or ten patents; the "resonating" four or five more; the "vitalizing" six, and that before these could be prepared, or commenced even, a "vibratory dynamo" must be set up, which would require weeks to set up and graduate. The "sympathetic transmission" system also would require months to put into a patentable shape, also the "sympathetic governor."

With Keely's plans to form a new company, the ensuing reorganization of the old company, and Astor's attention towards him, the year 1895 ended undecided. In February 1896, the committee members of the Keely Motor Company were studying a counter proposition that Keely submitted.

Keely met with an accident on February 11, the day after he demonstrated his Vibratory Dynamo to the members of the Board. He was run over by either a car or a runaway horse on Chestnut Street.45 The accident shook him up severely and confined him to his house, so the whole reorganization plans were halted until he had time to recover. The stockholders met again on March 2, following the adjournment of their last meeting on December 11 of the previous year, an adjournment that was effected to "allow time for the preparation of a satisfactory plan of reorganization which should harmonize all conflicting interests." At the meeting of March 2, nothing of any substance was decided. Due to Keely's accident another adjournment was taken. A new date was set and the new meeting was planned for April 2.46
On the day before his accident, Keely demonstrated his Vibratory Dynamo Machine, that he also called a First-circuit Engine.47 The demonstration was successful; power was transmitted from an engine to a dynamo by means of a belt. The members of the Board who witnessed this test run thought that he had "obtained such control over his discovery as to entitle him to letters of patent broadly covering his process, and the machinery employed conducting it." The reorganization plans of the committee would be based upon his application for patents "at the earliest practicable period," wrote Ackermann, president of the Keely Motor Company.

This letter, written some three weeks after Keely's accident, and the reorganization plans that were put forward with a sudden elan, were partly a response to the bitter statement made the previous year quoting that Keely had decided to "take out no patents."

On April 2, during a somewhat stormy meeting, the report of the appointed committee was read. The plan was to secure to the Keely Motor Company the exclusive rights in the territory covered by former agreements, Keely's two systems of producing power. The plan also stipulated that no reorganization should be made until Keely had produced a practicable machine and had applied for patents. A letter from Keely, dated March 31, was also read. He agreed to this plan, while remarking that he believed that he was safe in assuming that those present at his demonstration of the First-circuit Engine were satisfied that he had indeed attained "substantial control of my power, and that complete success in a commercial form of engine is clearly in sight and a question of but a few months at furthest."

The report of the committee recited the agreements made between Keely and the company, and acknowledged the ownership of his new system that he discovered in 1882 and of which he claimed that the Keely Motor Company had no rights whatsoever. The report stated that Keely's claim "seems to be a valid one, and the directors evidently took that view in 1887, as also did the stockholders, as shown by the minutes of the annual meetings." The proposition was therefore to reorganize the company for the purpose of acquiring the rights to his other discovery "within the territorial limits of the company."

There were still some loose ends. The report noticed that one of the outcomes of the suit against him made in 1882, namely a decree of the Court that specifically directed him to file with the Court the necessary specifications for taking out patents on the inventions owned by the company, had not been done. Keely insisted that another clause in the decree, namely to provide him with "a proper amount of money for his maintenance and for perfecting his inventions," also had not been done. He then explained that, in order to procure means, he had been obliged to make agreements, called "assignments," that could be converted into stock of "any new company that may be formed." He also claimed that the agreement called for the use of 100,000 shares of the Keely Motor Company's stock as a working capital, to "which use it had not been put." The committee concluded that "there was matter of difference enough between the parties to litigate upon for a generation," and that the best thing to do was to "wipe out the past and start with a fresh deal."51
And as always, there were differences. A number of wealthy stockholders from New York expressed their "considerable dissatisfaction" with the way things were going. Motions were presented and defeated, and the plan was finally adopted "after considerable argument and some bitter words." To mend things, Collier, Ackermann, who claimed to be an expert mechanical engineer, and another member of the committee who "was looked upon as an expert electrician and chemist, all cried in chorus that 'They saw enough of Keely's new etheric vibratory system...to satisfy them that it was the greatest invention on earth.'" So Keely was to be given one-half of the capital stock, one-fourth to the stockholders and one-fourth to be held by the company. Of the 50,000 shares Present, about 45,000 shares voted in favor of the new plan.

But what about the obtaining of patents? After all, without patents on Keely's devices there would be no reorganization. When pressed for an answer, Collier stated that "he did not know, and he then explained that the question was one of 'much difficulty.'" Collier further said that, "If it were an ordinary invention, I have no doubt that suitable drawings could be prepared, and an application made for a patent in four or five days. In some respects, the machinery is simple, but as it includes the workings of electricity and chemistry the matter of preparing a lucid explanation of it is difficult. In order to get a patent it is necessary to have specifications so plain that when the patent expires anyone can construct a machine from them and the drawings. That is what the drawings and specifications are for. It is right here that the difficulty begins, and I can't say whether the patent can be secured in three weeks or in six months. In dealing with this invention, which I regard as the most important ever made, ordinary plans cannot be used. "53 It was announced that the meeting would be adjourned until June.
With matters as inconclusive as always, opinions concerning Keely once again widely varied. The press certainly grew wary, and two weeks after the meeting, one Philadelphia newspaper cynically reported that, while feeling obliged "in common with other papers" to publish the "vague items of news respecting the Keely motor," that "Much of the apparatus which he exhibits is trivial in character, developing little power, or in its present form is of no apparent mechanical value." And while it declared that "it has never joined in the ridicule to which Mr. Keely's invention or discovery has been subjected," and recognized that "there was a field for such discoveries," it now had lost its patience. "Mr. Keely can at any time, if he possesses a new force, have his discovery generally acknowledged by taking his apparatus to the Franklin Institute or the Philosophical Society and exhibiting its manifestations of power under test conditions excluding the use of known forces, and until he is ready to do this it will be a waste of time for sensible men to discuss the subject." It concluded that the world was not required to prove anything; that was Keely's business, for "he is the challenger. "

A week later President Ackermann of the Keely Motor Company picked up the glove and stated that "The commercial engine is now practically complete, and will probably have its first public test on a street car..," and as a reaction to the negotiations with Astor et al. that had failed, he also declared that "It is true that we no longer need or desire outside capital..."55 No public test occurred in April, but the next month a new and shattering event took place. Because its real causes have never been properly examined, the event has always wrongfully been interpreted by antagonists as another indication that Keely was a fraud.

On May 4, Bloomfield-Moore, Keely's staunch supporter, notified both Keely and the Keely Motor Company that she would no longer continue her support, and five days later she issued a statement to the press: "The announcement that the Keely Motor Company no longer needs or desires assistance has terminated the contract between Mrs. Bloomfield-Moore and Mr. John W. Keely, entered into between them verbally in 1888 and signed by them on April 5, 1890." She further stated that the Keely Motor Company would resume its responsibilities and would provide him with all the needed funds for his "costly researching instruments and for the construction of an engine which can be operated by others as well as by himself." According to her, until that happened there was no commercial value that warranted the proposed reorganization, and the putting on the market of an additional 500,000 shares of stock.

To examine this event, we must first look into Bloomfield-Moore's private life, and discover her motivation for the support of, and then withdrawal of support of Keely. While it is already established that her motivation laid in her thinking that she would save another inventor whose invention would possibly hold great merit for mankind,58 other important reasons are to be found in her private life, which had a sad history attached to it.

To begin with, while she is always referred to as a rich woman, this was a rather exaggerated viewpoint. As she herself made plain when her husband died in 1878, he left her no money other than his life insurance. From this money she gave "every dollar" to institutions that he had "promised to endow during his life time." This was about $50,000. Her husband's estate was locked up in mills and machinery. What was worked out of this, she gave to her children and grandchildren. In January 1892, she also renounced all dividend claims of her late husband's business, the Jessup & Moore Paper Company, to her children and grandchildren. Her second daughter Lilian, suffering from a mental illness, was taken away from her. "Had she recovered, I could not have helped Mr. Keely in any way with my Puritan strictness of ideas as to doing the duty that lies nearest to me before extending the field," wrote Bloomfield-Moore.59 In 1888, her daughter was again taken from her and conveyed to Sweden. In 1874, her daughter had married the influential Baron Carl Nils Daniel de Bildt, the first Lord Chamberlain of Sweden and Swedish Minister to Italy, who was also considered
"an eminent historian."

Rumor had it that her daughter was taken away to secure control of her money in Sweden, although Bloomfield-Moore denied this.60 The reason that her daughter was removed for the second time, as she wrote to a friend several years later, "was because of my having employed Dr. Hartmann who was the first to tell me of the curative powers of light in mental disorders."

Possibly those that decided that her daughter should move to Sweden were abhorred by Hartmann's reputation, who met with Keely on two occasions and whose character was steeped in occultism, esoteric societies, neo-templarism and theosophy.62 He had studied medicine in Munich, but in 1865, without having qualified, sailed to the
U.S. as a ship's doctor. There he would obtain "some sort of medical qualification" in St. Louis, probably at the Eclectic Medical College, an institution that was "notorious for its low standards." Hartmann practiced medicine in several different states.

In Sweden, Bloomfield-Moore's daughter "fell back into a state worse than the first." Bloomfield-Moore was summoned at "the Police Direction" in Vienna to answer questions about Keely, it having been stated that she was under "a delusion in furnishing with money a man known to be a fraud."

We will not digress here any further in the tragic family affairs of a woman who by every contemporary source is being pictured as intelligent, unselfish and working for the benefit of mankind. What it illustrates, however, is the entangled and confused state of Keely's beneficiary, and it provides the background of Clarence B. Moore's statement made the year before that his mother was "insane." In fact, there seems to have been a bitter struggle between son and mother over the will of her late husband, as illustrated in a letter of Bloomfield-Moore: "If my eldest daughter is the next victim of my children's rebellion against their father's will, my son will be solely responsible for it..." Elsewhere she writes that "...futile would be his efforts against the invincible armor which I wear."

We need not speculate over this point here, for a confirmation is to be found elsewhere: "By 1888, however, the courts again threatened, and this time Mrs. Bloomfield-Moore's son was able to deprive his mother of all legal and material rights, thus stopping the flow of his 'inheritance' toward Keely's endeavors."66 And about this, Bloomfield-Moore herself wrote that "In 1889 efforts were made to prove that I was incompetent to take charge of the estate and of my invalid daughter."

Bloomfield-Moore's letters on this sad affair that have survived reflect her anguish and kindness to all those concerned to a great degree, but also the concern of others who knew of her pains. Strangely, in one of her letters, written in 1895, she writes of having received a letter "from an Englishman who thinks that my son may be as well as I the victim of a conspiracy...," a topic that she only mentioned in her letter, but upon which she digressed no further.

Suffice to say that, aside from the earlier mentioned reason of her wanting to help a struggling inventor and through him, hoping to do something for mankind, she may have wanted to find some consolation for her own much-troubled soul: "Had it not been for the new interest in Keely's life which his discoveries brought to me at a time when the ploughers ploughed upon my heart and made long furrows, I should have been, years ago, in my grave or the inmate of a madhouse," she wrote.69 Furthermore she also wrote that she could help Keely only because she could not properly extend her help to her children and grandchildren: "I would have prayed that the work might be given to another; feeling that I could best serve my Creator in serving those whom he had given to me to lead in the ways of righteousness.... I now have seven grandchildren, who are as children to me; two of whom are married. As each one marries I wish in consideration of the uncertainty of all kinds of security in America as is thought in Sweden, to have his or her share invested in their own country, and this desire has led me into some injustice to myself; having advanced to them all of my income for this year and, my agent writes, well into the next year."

That was the reason that she could not provide Keely with any more funding. Since they both agreed that her funding would stop as soon as he reached a commercially exploitable stage, and Keely had proclaimed this, all came together. She wanted to mend things between her and her family members, and it relieved her of the responsibilities of which she had written some six years before that she "so long carried...at the cost of placing a barrier between myself and all those members of my family, who do not approve my course in assuming obligations which belong to the company to fulfill under its contract with Keely."

Naturally the Keely Motor Company protested and "made overtures to Mrs. Moore with a view to her continued support," but to no effect.72 Keely's reactions are not known, but he seems to have held no objection to her stopping her funding, as the terms of settlement offered by the company were unsatisfactory not only to Bloomfield- Moore, but also to Keely.

On June 4, a meeting of the company stockholders was held, but nothing of any substance was reached, since no quorum was present. Schuellerman stated inter alia that the plan, adopted on April 2, was not "in accordance with the by-laws," since no quorum was present when the plan was adopted. Since now, too, no quorum was present, the meeting was again adjourned, but without setting a date. A special meeting would be held to consider the plan.74 The annual meeting on December 10 also showed the same total lack of interest; only five stockholders were present and so the meeting was again adjourned, but no date set. Collier remarked that he was "about to draw up the patent specifications covering Keely's inventions, but that it would take considerable time for him to study the apparatus and comprehend the essential features sufficiently to draw up the specifications." It furthermore was remarked that, "Until they have been filed and the claims are allowed the company has no tangible property."

The year 1897 came, and after a quarter of a century, still no patents based on Keely's discoveries existed. In January, newspapers in America and England told of a scientist who had witnessed a test-run of the Keely motor and was greatly impressed with what he saw. The unnamed scientist declared that Keely "had certainly discovered a new force, which ought eventually be of inestimable value." Several other scientists who were present also found no evidence of the working of any power known to them and they felt "in the presence of something wonderful and beyond their comprehension." But it was also noted that Keely's explanations did nothing to help matters, as these were "couched in hopelessly obscure language." The most that the visiting scientist could make out was that the wheel was kept in motion "by some occult sympathy, allied in a certain way to the elements of music."

Keely must have felt quite lonely at times; after all, Bloomfield-Moore had been much more than a funder. Her directions had helped steer his research, and the books she gave him provided him with a theoretical foundation. Perhaps she was one of those rare persons who understood his explanations, or at least grasped the new horizons that lay concealed in his dense prose.

Now he worked solely for the Keely Motor Company. He was becoming an old man suffering from Bright's disease. From photographs taken at that time, his eyes burned defiantly from an emaciated face. There is no way that we may establish with any certainty what he was thinking of the years that lay behind him with his grandiose plans of unlimited free-energy and a sky filled with immense airships propelled by his aerial propeller that lay still and quiet in a corner of his workshop. Keely stayed in contact with Bloomfield-Moore though, a contact that must have given him great comfort and consolation at times.

There were the occasional rumors in the press; in May, W.K. Fransioli, general manager of the Manhattan Elevated Railroad—who went to Keely's workshop to see the legendary engine on the invitation of the Keely Motor Company —gave rise to the story that the New York Railroad Company would try his engine. This was denied. The man went to the workshop because he was "always interested in anything appertaining to motive power," although he did admit that he went to Philadelphia "entirely unbiased and I returned impressed."

Fransioli had been accompanied by M. McNally, the master mechanic of the railroad company. They not only saw the motor work, but Keely also took the motor apart for them. They saw all its parts, but Fransioli would not say what he saw in the dismantled motor, as he did not think that "would be just for Mr. Keely."

When pressed for more details, Fransioli described the motor as being a "round covering, as big as the diameter of a stove pipe hat. An ordinary non-insulated wire was run from the motor to an engine that was run with high speed." Fransioli was certain that no electric current was used. The wire was removed with bare hands and no shock was felt. The engine stopped immediately. A member of the Keely Motor Company declared that, in his opinion, "John Keely has.. .found the foundation source of electricity. He has the aurora borealis chained down, sir."

Bloomfield-Moore was informed in writing of the visit, and from it we learn of another, underlying motive of the visit that was not mentioned in the press. She wrote to the correspondent: "I should be, as you write, 'gratified with the renewed attention paid to Mr. Keely by the New York railroad people,' were it not that, in my opinion, this is another attempt to 'boom' the stock of the old Keely Motor Company, before the time is ripe for science to announce the discovery by Keely of an unknown force in nature. Not until this announcement is made, and the exact position of Keely's present mechanical progress is given to the public, will speculation become legitimate.  Until this has been accomplished these efforts of stock-jobbers do more harm to the cause than good; although personally I am benefited by their premature announcements."

She also announced her plans to visit Keely's workshop with Professor G.F. Fitzgerald. She told Fitzgerald that "the days of experiment and investigation are ended. He does not wish to investigate, but will go to Philadelphia for the purpose of meeting Mr. Keely and to witness the operation of the Vibrodyne." Professor Fitzgerald writes: "I look forward to the time when Mr. Keely will be able to describe his methods that his experiments may be repeated by every scientific man who desires to do so, and be then satisfied by his own observation of how they are produced." Fitgerald, a member of the British Association, would then travel to Toronto. "It was with this hope in view," continued Bloomfield-Moore, "(of having the announcement made in Toronto) that I was working when the action of those commercially interested brought Mr. Franzioli (sic) into premature communication with Mr. Keely. But this time they have rendered me a positive service personally, and should this 'renewed interest' in Keely's work last, what I most desire may yet be accomplished in Toronto; viz., that science shall hold the helm, instead of commerce, until the mechanical combination is as obedient to the law of nature, which governs all planetary masses throughout the universe."

In June, Keely gave another demonstration, and "As usual in the Keely seances, the spectators were much impressed with the queer looking engine moving in repines to musical vibrations." One of the reporters remarked that, "It did not revolve rapidly, for the reason that the inventor has just begun work on it, more to determine its strength than anything else. Next week he will give an exhibition of its power, and later of its velocity." A newspaper scathingly remarked that "this is the true Keely mark, next week and next year...Mr. Keely is now an old man, and has devoted his working years to a motor that nobody can understand after it is explained, and nobody can say whether it is deception, delusion, or an elusive idea founded on something real."

The press and the public were growing weary of an inventor who, as a newspaper wrote, "for thirty-five years, at intervals...has been calling in a select company to witness the first practical operation of his etheric engine. To a certain extent it moves, but something in the machinery is found to be not quite right, and a few more weeks for rectification are necessary. Perhaps a year or two elapses, and the performance is then repeated. A generation has passed since the inventor announced that he had discovered and applied a new force in nature. He has never had much trouble in making converts.  Yet it is always next month or next year that the final practical results are to be attained and the mechanical world revolutionized. The request for a little more delay wound up last week's exhibition, as usual."

In January 1898, the event of a paper80 read to the Engineer's Club, drew headlines.81 Its writer, E. A. Scott, electrical engineer by profession, declared that Keely had discovered "no new force" and had shown "no apparatus which demonstrated, or could demonstrate, such a force, but that many of the things done by Keely could be readily performed by the operation of well-known laws of nature." He had visited Keely's workshop on a number of occasions. About Keely's famous levitation experiments, involving glass jars filled with water and metal balls and discs he saw no mysterious etheric principle at work. To Scott it was merely the principle of the "Cartesian Diver," and the weights in the jar were so constructed as to just sink in the normal condition of the jar, but to rise when a slight increase of air pressure was put upon the surface through a fine tube carrying, not surprisingly, compressed air. Of this alleged tube, Collier emphatically stated that this was a platinum wire. Collier also offered to give a lecture to the Engineers Club, but when asked if he would bring Keely along with the jar in question, he said that Keely had repeatedly refused to do anything of the kind.

Collier was asked if he knew the real facts regarding Keely's discovery, and if he could continue Keely's work in case of the death of the inventor. He replied that he and Thomas knew "all that Keely had discovered, and that in the event of Keely's death, he would be willing to give the desired explanation."

Collier would not let matters rest there. His countermove was quick and definitive, and toward the end of March he wrote to the press: "Since the delivery of Mr. Scott's address, upon my invitation not less than fifty gentlemen, including engineers, electricians, chemists and mechanics, have visited Keely's laboratory, all of whom have seen his machinery operated and some of whom have seen it as well in its wholly dismantled condition. To each and all I have called specific attention to Mr. Scott's assertion that said wires are tubes and invited them to investigate for themselves and they have done so, and all found them to be what I assert, wires."

And what was Keely doing? While there are no direct references as to his activities during his last years, he once again stated that he at last solved the problem of harnessing the ether, and proudly declared: "My work is now complete."

But was it? A reporter wrote that he announced that "after a labor extending through three decades he has discovered a new cosmic force. For years Mr. Keely claims to have been conscious of a power, but was unable to harness it for commercial purposes. Now, he says, he has solved the problem and that by this force steam and electricity will be at a discount, as his discovery costs practically nothing to operate it."

Keely unfolded grandiose visions, everything was possible through the medium of his new cosmic force: "With the new power railroad trains can be run at the rate of five miles a minute. I am aware that this is a broad assertion, but I have thoroughly studied the power of my new force, and know what I am talking about. Under the present condition of railroads, it will be practically impossible to attain this rate of speed, as it would tear the rails up and shake the cars too." Keely also expected to be able to place a machine on the market "in complete form inside of two months which will fully demonstrate his claims. "85 The months passed by, but this year too would see no engine that pushed trains on reinforced rails at tremendous speeds, propelled by the forces of the cosmos.

Keely died on November 18, 1898, the same day that a Philadelphia newspaper reported that he was seriously ill with pneumonia at his home located at 1632 Oxford Street: "Mr. Keely contracted a severe cold last week, which necessitated his taking to bed on Saturday. He was resting quietly today, and his recovery is expected."

A day later, another newspaper reported the sad news in a long article, containing a number of errors, such as that Keely never applied for, or obtained a patent.

"John Worrell Keely, the inventor of the 'Keely Motor' died yesterday afternoon at 3:00 at his late residence, 1632 Oxford Street, aged 71 years," the article ran. "Mr. Keely had been sick only a week. He first complained of being ill on Thursday of last week to Dr. Chase, of Boston, who called on him at his office while on a visit to this city. He contracted a severe cold, which developed into pneumonia, and for the last three days his condition was considered critical. He rallied somewhat yesterday morning, but soon after grew rapidly weaker, and it was evident he could not recover. He had always enjoyed robust health until three years ago, when his friends noticed that he had lost much of his vigor, and about this time he had an operation performed on his eyes, prior to which during a critical physical examination by his medical attendant it was discovered that he was a sufferer from Bright's disease, although Mr. Keely would never admit this. About two years ago he was run over by a team on Broad Street,88 and very much shaken up, and this seemed to have affected his health to a considerable degree. Mr. Keely was twice married, and leaves a widow, but no children."

Four days after his death, a newspaper published a list of pallbearers for the funeral services that reflected the wide and intriguing scope of the Keely history. Among others this list included John W. Keely, with whom was probably meant his brother J.A. Keely, Charles Hill, Barton Kincaid, with whom was meant Burton Kinraide and who we shall meet again, Ackermann and Peabody, John Jacob Astor, Professor Lascelles Scott, Professors Joseph Dewar and William B. Crooks, Wayne MacVeagh, Daniel Brinton, Collier, Zentmayer, Boekel and Schuellerman. Singing during the funeral services would be by the choir of the Twentieth Street Methodist Episcopal Church, Twentieth and Jefferson Streets, and by Rev. and Mrs. John G. Wilson and D. and G. Conquest Anthony.

The funeral services were held at 10:00 a.m. on November 23 at Keely's late residence at 1632 Oxford Street. Long before 10:00 a.m., a large crowd of those who had known him, and those who were curious to take a last look at the inventor, assembled into the parlor of the first floor of the residence. There his body was laid in a mahogany coffin with oxidized trimmings. A silver plate on the lid bore the inscription, "John Worrall (sic) Keely, in his sixty-third year."

Keely rested among flowers, and a huge bouquet was presented by the directors of the company, and another by the trustees of the Twentieth Street Methodist Episcopal Church, of which he was a member. There were also bouquets from his friends in New York, Boston and Philadelphia. Anna Keely had placed near the coffin "a touching tribute of her love. It was a heart of red immortals. This design was so arranged that one-half of it might be buried with Mr. Keely and the other half kept by the bereaved woman."

The funeral services were largely attended. Among those present were the directors of the company, the trustees of the Twentieth Street Methodist Episcopal Church and friends from New York and Boston. Not all appointed pallbearers were present; notably Lascelles Scott, Dewar, Crooks and Astor were absent, as their names do not appear in the contemporary press accounts. The choir sang, and several speeches were made, among others by his friend William Colville. After the services, his body was taken to West Laurel Hill Cemetery, where it was put in the receiving vault to await the preparation of his tomb. When the 100	Free Energy Pioneer: John Worrell Keely coffin was placed in the vault Anna Keely broke the red heart in two, "leaving one part with the dead and taking the other home with her."

Immediately after his death, strange rumors and legends sprang up. It was written for instance that "It is not known whether the secret of his motor...died with him. It is said that a few of his intimate friends know the secret, but it is not known whether they will be able to make any practicable use of it."

And a little later, Collier said that "when Mr. Keely was taken sick he was just about to take out patents on his last machine, which he confidently asserted was to be the successful finale of his 25 years of experiments. He further asserted that he and Lancaster Thomas, a noted local chemist, were in possession of sufficient practicable information to enable them to complete the work and take out the letters patent. "The machine will be patented," said Mr. Collier. "When, I cannot just say now."

Keely's one-time generous patroness Bloomfield-Moore died only a few months later on January 5, 1899, in London, England.94 Five days later and a continent away, Tesla would sign his so-desired contract with elusive Astor, the former with whom Bloomfield-Moore had undoubtedly exchanged mutual hopes and ideas for the elevation of mankind, the latter with whom she had sailed on the Nourmahal across the boundless seas of expectation.

Science writer Henry Dam, who was also Bloomfield-Moore's literary executor, said: "I knew that when Mr. Keely died she would not live long. Her whole life was centered in his work, to the exclusion of all other interests and hopes. She had the most profound faith that neither Mr. Keely nor herself could die until the invention had succeeded. After receiving the cabled announcement of Mr. Keely's death she began to sink rapidly. Her ailment seemed more mental than physical."