# 来自亚特兰蒂斯的Vril：基利的遗产 

11 Vril from Atlantis Keely's Legacy

"Just imagine a machine that is constructed in such a way, that it does not operate by steam or electricity, but by those waves that man generates in his tone, in his speech. Just imagine such a motor that one may operate by those waves or perhaps by the generation of his spiritual life. It was still an ideal. Thank god that it was an ideal at that time, because what would have become of this war when this Keely- ideal had become a reality in those days!"

Rudolf Steiner 

Weltwesen und Ichheit, lecture held in Berlin, June 20, 1916


When Steiner lectured about Keely on several occasions between 1905 and 1920, he found an occult landscape that was already riddled with experiments with the ether and strange devices that were sometimes commercially exploited, as in the case of Korschelt's apparatus. In all probability some of Steiner's occult associates learned about Keely as early as 1882 after Hartmann's visit or perhaps by reading The Secret Doctrine, which was published in 1888. It must be taken into account that the occult underground with all its connections, alliances and liaisons was hardly a coherent whole, aiming to achieve unison through one thing although often its inhabitants strived at the same idea.

There is a mere glimpse of what Steiner meant and enclosed in a riddle. He made elaborate drawings and sketches of mysterious devices called the Strader Apparatus and its three accompanying devices. Although as we have seen, there were many more devices sprinkled across the occult spectrum, Steiner's Strader Apparatus has attained somewhat mythical proportions. However strange these devices were, they were meant to be seen; the four devices were to be used in Steiner's theater plays, known as the Mystery Plays. The original models of the devices disappeared from the first Goetheaneum that burned down. The origin of the fire that destroyed the building has sometimes been explained as the doings of Nazis who hated Steiner, or as the result of faulty wiring. But we might also speculate that the fire may actually have been started by the highly unusual experiments involving the research of the forces of the ether which were conducted there and which might have gone wrong, experiments of which years later the experimenter was still not allowed to talk about.

The first Goetheaneum building was built out of the same wood as that used in the construction of violins, thus ensuring the large domed hall capabilities of resonance and vibration. Steiner's devices did survive the fire that struck the building though, since so conveniently "for some kind of reason they were not present during this night." An explanation for the disappearance of the original models was that they were not cared for because the significance of them was not recognized at the time.

Likewise, little documentary information survived. Although the Strader Apparatus was the main device, it was accompanied by three other, smaller and equally enigmatic devices. Steiner made three sketches of the main device and its three accompanying devices, which were used as an ensemble in his fourth part of the third of the Mystery Plays, titled Der Huter an der Schwelle, or The Guardian at the Threshold, its title a veiled tribute to Zanoni.

There are also a number of drawings made by Oskar Schmiedel, who built the Strader devices to Steiner's specifications, in addition to a number of unidentified sketches. Schmiedel claims that Steiner gave him elaborate and very detailed descriptions for the construction of the models, which he and some technicians built in the winter of 1912-1913, coincidentally the same period that Keely's "secrets" were allegedly sent to Sweden.

What function the Strader Apparatus and its three accompanying devices exactly had is not clear. Steiner's orders for the staging of the devices in the fourth part are only minimal: "On his (Strader's) table are to be found models of mechanisms." Walter Kugler remarks that, "it could be of significance for a further exposition of the Strader Apparatus that there is no mention of an 'apparatus,' but of 'models of apparatus,' which are the first prototype, and still need a further development."

Schmiedel nevertheless speaks of how "impressive" Steiner's specifications were: "One part was even to consist of a metal or a substance, that was not yet discovered. It is difficult to say with any certainty what the means of these devices were. The main device appeared to me to be something like a condensator for rays and workings that would emanate from the cosmos, possibly also a transformator for these. Various metals: antimonium, copper, nickel and also uranium pitchblende were used; besides a surrogate for the above referred to and not yet discovered substance that was to be painted blue. Except from this main device, a number of others were indicated. On the wall hung a half globe of copper. Its inner side was pointed towards the main device. Another device represented perhaps some kind of measuring device.  Once he also mentioned when this invention of Strader would become reality. It would be in a not too distant future. Unfortunately I do not recall these dates."



When the play Der Huter an der Schwelle was performed in 1912 in Munich, there had been so little time that only a contrivance was ready,—a shadow of what was to be—built on Steiner's directions by Imme von Eckartstein. During the winter more time was available to build an exact model by using different metals for the half globes; one made out of antimonium, one made of nickel, the fourth half globe, or shell, was half made of copper, the other half made out of the metal "which was not discovered yet." Under this half globe hung the thinnest "feeler organs," made out of very thin goldwire. On the fourth side of a lead cross was to be assembled a spire of uranium pitchblende. The connections of the six spires were partly copper and partly tin. From one shell to another opposite led a spiral glass tube. But "even more mysterious were the three accompanying devices, one of which representing a glass bowl with a platinum wire, molten or hung in it, the second was a flat lying figure eight made of glass tubing, adorned on the top with a spire of coal, with a small shell of copper on it. The third contrivance was to be again equipped with four uranium spires in horizontal fashion. The shape of this device suggests that it could rotate. Electricity should be kept away from it."9 The main device was to be put on a table: somewhat in the distance stood the other three devices, also on a table. The copper bowl adorned a wall.

Owing to its mysterious nature, the Strader device invited several occult explanations, the most interesting and complex being that it could be seen as "the inversion of Steiner's design of his Heavenly Jerusalem" of 1908. From there a deep plunge is taken into the fourth dimension, cabalistical doctrine, the tarot, Gnosis, heat and light as more-dimensional phenomena, related to movement and vibration, Atlantean energy precedes, and crystals as the "substitute for the perpetuum mobile." The Strader device, we learn from all this, was the pre-design of an ether converter, which, "contrary to Keely's converters, had almost no moving parts (transformator part) that lead to the increase of power."

With the ideas behind his Mystery Plays and the construction of the curious Strader devices, Steiner found himself in very good company. A year later in 1913 in France, Albert Caillet published his massive bibliography on the occult sciences: a staggering compendium of the occult, hermetic, alchemical and Rosicrucian publications from the earliest days of printing until that time, a work so complete that it is in use even today and has not been surpassed. But in Germany, other things were taking shape. The occult was rapidly transfiguring itself into a new order. A whole occult movement blossomed feverishly, deeply embedded in the German social strata, with as its most important philosophical cornerstones Mesmer, Von Reichenbach, Bulwer-Lytton and ultimately Keely, who in the eyes of many a theosophist and anthroposophist had discovered a force that was best kept hidden from mankind. And they had good reasons for thinking so; Europe was creeping towards what would be the First World War, and a 1913 wave of unexplained aerial objects equipped with powerful lights that struck parts of England, Holland, France and Germany was explained as the doings of "spy ships of the enemy." The mysterious objects were accordingly nicknamed in the newspapers as "scareships."

Fevered and strange the times must have been, just a year away from the horrors of the First World War. But in the meantime, Steiner had conceived his devices, and experiments were made by others, such as the photography of thoughts—called psychography—in which Friedrich Feerhow claimed that he had succeeded.12 Feerhow also published his theories on the human aura, subtitled "a new contribution to the problem of the radioactivity of man,"13 and also his "influence of the earth magnetic zones on man," in which he considered the aurora borealis "an odic phenomenon," in accordance with Von Reichenbach, who also thought so.14 Feerhow mused on the Od- rays and the N-rays as discovered by the French scientist Blondot, "named N-Rays because the French researchers had no knowledge of the results of their German predecessor."15 Pamphlets, booklets, books and learned treatises were issued in which not only Blondot's N-rays, but also Dubois' "organic fluorescens," Prof. Jager's "An- thropin," Justinus Kerner's "Nervengeist" or "Nervespirit," Dr. Baraduc's "Biod," Ziegler's "Pouviour irritant," Darget's "V-rays," Korschelt's "Dark suns (etheric) Rays," of course Mesmer's "Animal magnetism," Luys' and Rochas' "Effluviums," Dr. Narkiewicz-Jodkos' "Electrographics" and a multitude of other discoveries of new forms of force and energy were discussed.

The very borders of conventional science were not only traversed, but also severely questioned. Means that once were considered pure magic were dusted off and transformed; thus bewitching and casting spells were a "form of telepathy," the moving tables of the spiritists surely were the result of as-yet undiscovered energies and forces. The negation of gravity was discussed, as were telesthesia, telenergy, mental suggestion and magical thought transfer. The magnetic healing of wounds, the fluidal body of man and the doctrine of thought waves, "the understanding of thoughts as psychosphical energy... already formulated by the Russian researcher Dr. Naum Kotik," was explained in yet another brochure. Magic was considered to be a form of "nature science" and a doctor, Adam Voll, wrote upon the dowsing equipment and the sidereal pendulum,20 while Robert Blum confided his theories to anybody who would read his book that was published in three tomes suggestively called The Fourth Dimension. In the first part, Blum followed Keely's doctrine in propagating a threefold order to be found in all nature, while the third part was suggestively entitled In the Realm of Vibrations.21 Interestingly enough, a German translation of Shelley's Frankenstein, or the Modern Prometheus also was reprinted during that period.22 Much of the above was published by theosophical publisher Max Altmann. His Zentralblatt fur den Okkultismus, published in 1908, was to be the first monthly occult periodical in Germany.23 Altmann also published Moderne Rosenkreuzer by occultist and neo-Rosicrucian G.W. Surya in 1907. The book that was in its seventh edition in 1930 treated much of the above and recommended many of these brochures. Meanwhile from the theosophical quarters, authors such as Leadbetter and Besant had already rained down a torrent of books and pamphlets on thoughtforms, the ether, the Akasha, chakras and the human aura.

Two years after the construction of Steiner's first Strader instrumentarium, which was only a tip of the German occult iceberg, in Paris the French alchemical circle around the fabled alchemist Fulcanelli was deeply involved in the construction of a "Turbo Propulseur," or a "curious aerial sled," that was first conceived by Jean-Julien Champagne in 1911. We learn nothing of its appearance, its propulsion or in fact the underlying motivation for an alchemist to conceive of such a device, save a sketchy description. The vehicle was powered by a motor-driven propeller, and was said to be "quite suitable for travel on roads."24 What the actual motor consisted of was not mentioned. Elsewhere it is being described as a "polar vehicle," and its propeller was still in construction in 1914.25 It was eventually presented to Tsar Nicholas II, allegedly through the French occultist Papus, who resided at his court around that time.

In 1914, while the French alchemical circles were still busy with the construction of the propeller of their strange vehicle and shortly before the outbreak of the First World War, a German named Franz Philipp purportedly succeeded in lifting his "Sonnenkraft-Triebwerk," or solar-powered motor, into the air in Germany.27 Perhaps the experiment was the result of the earlier-mentioned widely held discussions in Germany on the negation of gravity, in matter as well as the human body, but we do not know, for the only thing that Philipp wrote considering the nature of his invention was that he discovered its principles with a device of his making for the study of the solar protuberances during a total solar eclipse. Based on what he then discovered, he would construct several aerial craft and eventually spaceships with "ever better propulsion systems." According to Philipp, all this would lead to space travel well before World War II.

An impenetrable and suspicious curtain of vagueness surrounds his claim. Studying his bizarre book, one is quick to dismiss the writings of Philipp as those of a lunatic, or as a parody on UFOs and ufology in general. To make matters worse, nowhere in his book does he lift the veil on the exact nature of his supposed solar- powered motor, while on the other hand the pages are filled with wild and unproven allegations without a shred of evidence that any of it was true.

The case however obtains a sinister and ominous dimension when we read elsewhere that Philipp was found dead in his Berlin apartment in the late 1970s, after having laid there for two weeks. It is also stated that at one time the CIA tried to "assassinate Philipp at least once." Then there is mention of his connections with self- styled counter Pope Clemens XV, who was the head of the Order of Saint Michael and the founder of the "New Church" located in the east of France and in 1970 was said to have numbered some 50,000 members in Germany, France and Italy. This New Church believed in the salvation of mankind with the help of extraterrestrials.28 The fate of his solar-powered motor, if it ever existed outside of his imagination, is now unknown, but perhaps the fact that the memory of Philipp is again cherished in certain contemporary German occultist underground circles where his ideas are currently linked with what has become a whole ideology—or a religion in the making—of vril, speaks for itself.

In this strange history, we again encounter isolated cases. A year after Philipp's discovery and a continent away, an electrical engineer named C.E. Ammann, residing in Denver, started working on something of a more tangible nature and what he eventually called "the atmospheric generator." A Denver newspaper reported seven years later that the device, according to Ammann, could "draw energy out of the air." The atmospheric generator was described as a "compact cylindrical object with two small brass spheres protruding from the top." Inside was to be found "an arrangement of steel wires and minerals so fixed as to draw the energy from the air," somehow echoing Timmins' pneumatic generator a quarter of a century before. The device was demonstrated in 1921; it was attached to an automobile which was then driven around the city. The device was inspected; it was agreed that Ammann, who was then 28 years of age, had "made an invention that will revolutionize power," and that "we have long known that certain minerals exist which, if properly arranged together, would furnish power." Ammann, we learn, was planning to go to Washington for a patent that very same week in 1921, but we hear no more of him or his device.

The air was filled with energy in those days. In 1916, Harry E. Perrigo invented a converter to extract electricity out of the air. He worked on his device between 1916 and 1927. He discovered that it produced more electricity when a breeze was allowed to circulate through the room or when a warm body stood close to the antenna of the device.30 A great invention, but of which we also hear nothing more.

Perrigo was followed in 1917, just a year later, by an Armenian immigrant named Garabed T.K. Giragossian, who lived in Boston. Giragossian claimed to have discovered an inexhaustible source of free-energy, which he called The Garabed. He stated that his discovery would make the steam engine a thing of the past. His source of free-energy would power ships, airships and locomotives. Although he was vague about the exact nature of his discovery, prominent Bostonians would vouch for his honesty. Giragossian apparently convinced Congress, for in 1918 President Woodrow Wilson signed a resolution to protect him and his discovery. Interestingly, he did not want money, but protection. Four scientists and an engineer saw his device on June 29, 1918, and this commission delivered its report, just one paragraph long, the same day. Its conclusion was that Giragossian's claims were false.

The invention seems to have been a massive flywheel that, once set in motion, would be kept turning by a miniature 1/25 horsepower electric motor. When linked to a brake-type dynamometer, the spinning wheel would briefly produce up to 10 horsepower before it stopped. Giragossian and friends insisted that the commission did not understand his invention, and Congressional supporters held more hearings in 1923 and 1924. Although he maintained that his Garabed would "reshape the destiny of mankind, creating an age of reason, an everlasting happiness," Congress voted no further action. Resolutions on Giragossian's behalf were proposed almost annually until 1930.

In 1919, two years after Giragossian's first public appearance, 19-year old Alfred Hubbard built and demonstrated his first device. Like Perrigo, Hubbard also claimed that "he was getting energy out of the air." One experiment made with the Hubbard transformer was the propelling of an 18-foot boat around Potage Bay near Seattle. A 35 horsepower electric motor was linked to a Hubbard transformer that measured 11 inches in diameter and 14 inches in length. It furnished enough energy to drive the boat and a pilot at a reasonable speed around the bay. Later Hubbard alleged that his transformer was powered with radioactive substances. Hubbard admitted that he had used the idea of power from the air to protect his real idea for a patent, and that his machine created electrical energy directly from radioactive materials, which he did not name. As far as can be determined, no U.S. patents were ever issued to Hubbard concerning this device, and Hubbard, like Ammann and all those before him, disappeared from the pages of history.

The same can be said of Lester Jennings Hendershot, who developed a device that he always maintained worked on the force that pulls around the needle of a compass. Hendershot claimed that during his experiments, he learned that by cutting the lines of the magnetic north and south he had an indication of the true north, which in his opinion was not the magnetic north of an ordinary compass. By cutting the magnetic field east and west, he found he could obtain a rotary motion, in which we find an echo of Keely's statements and of the very early designers of magnetic perpetuum mobiles. Hendershot built his first unit in the 1920s, but nothing seems to have come from his invention. There are vague tales that he went to Washington for a patent, but somehow this city does not favor young inventors, for as far as can be determined no U.S. patents were ever issued to him, and his doings in later years are largely unknown.

The same, or a possible grimmer fate awaited young inventor John Huston of Prineville, Oregon. Around 1920, he claimed to have invented a way to take "heat out of the air" with condensers. According to an eyewitness, the first poorly insulated rig boiled water in 20 minutes. The device was claimed to replace fuels, to be good for household heating or refrigeration and to be able to run railroad engines and steamboats. Huston and his father formed a company of 20 stockholders and he built an up-to-date model of his device. The model apparently worked better than expected, and Huston and his father took it to San Francisco to demonstrate it, since they hoped to interest manufacturers in building the device on a royalty basis. According to the eyewitness who talked to Huston after his return, Huston told him that, "The machine can be made so hot that it will destroy itself. Reverse the machine, and the temperature will go as low as 250 below zero." According to Huston, manufacturers in San Francisco "refused to build the machine because it would throw too many men out of work. It would also kill the sale of fuels, the major cargo of steamships at that time." He also stated that, even though the U.S. refused to patent the device, Canada and England did patent his invention. However, his remarkable invention disappeared, and he died a young man at the age of 22 in 1920 or 1921.

Although the original Strader instrumentarium also disappeared when Ste-iner's Goetheaneum burned down on December 31, 1922, that strange blend of technology and occultism did not disappear with it. It was perhaps this current, possibly experienced during his stay in Berlin between 1921 and 1922, that prompted Georgi Ivanovitch Gurdjieff to write about fantastic "tri-cerebrial beings," the "all-pervading Okidanokh" and the "tri-centric beings of Saturn," who possessed a bizarre device or installation, called the "khrakhartsakha," that was invented to study hitherto-unknown aspects of this cosmic substance.

What very much existed outside the borders of such an exercise in the fantastic was the German magical order Fraternitas Saturni, founded in 1928 in Berlin. The order had its roots in an occult society called "the Pansophical Lodge," or "Pansophia," originally founded as a loosely organized study group in Berlin shortly after the First World War. The group became more organized and changed its name "the Grand Pansophical Lodge of Germany, Orient Berlin" in 1923. After a visit by Aleister Crowley, a schism occurred; the Pansophia Lodge ceased to exist in 1926 and the Fraternitas Saturni came into existence. The Pansophia lodge, whose founder knew Ordo Templi Orientis cofounder Theodor Reuss quite well, was already bent on the curious fusion of technology and the arcane. Not much is known of the activities of the Berlin Pansophia lodge. However, in one of its publications one finds references to Babitt's Principles of Light and Colour and German occult philosopher Milankowitsch, who so elegantly formulated his theories on creation as a giant "world-machine" at the time that Spear was constructing his New Motor.

The publication also promised a training to any initiate of the first grade in which one would learn such matters as "unexplained miracles of nature," dowsing, the art of the pendulum, the od-force and magnetism, hypnosis and telepathy, matters that had set the German occult substrata a decade earlier in such an exalted and expectant state. Moreover, the initiate of the Pansophia lodge was required to experiment with "Od- rays" and the pendulum.

Beside studies in cabalistic doctrine, sidereal astrology and sympathetic magic, the initiate would learn during alchemical courses the secret of the Aurum Magicum: "This magical gold of fluidal and fiery appearance is also called the ointment of the wise, with which the true magus may establish the greatest miracles: 1. the magical Perpetuum mobile of the sidereal heavens in eternal circulation etc., and 2. With it the eternally burning lamps of the ancients can be lit."

The mind of the neophyte is carefully prepared for a journey into the spheres of the arcane. In a long and curious digression on alchemy, the initiate is immersed in a vast sea of hermetical and technical metaphors. Thus we read of "the spirit of imagination," of "love that mingled with wisdom," of "light-life" and of the dead, the "old Adamic man" that may rise through "the tincture (cosmic electricity, auric force, electro-)," of "etheric regions" and the "alchemical tincture."40 It is hinted that "alchemy has only one universal, not two and more. Yet this one can manifest itself in seven different rays, forces, energies, vibrations in various spheres or planes of existence."

But we also read that, "In the new coming times we will refute the hypotheses which were acknowledged until then, about the origin, rotation and evolution of the stars, suns and planetary systems. The human race will be magnificent and will be sensibly organized, will evoke a new meaning of life, with the help of which a totally new knowledge of nature's secrets will blossom. A new science will develop, in the direction of transcendental physiology and psychology. The world ether, these days once again rejected by science, will no longer be a vague hypothesis, when mankind will unriddle the secret of its existence through a variety of inventions and discoveries, through which those mechanic-material, chemical-technical conjunctions will disappear into nothingness. New problems will be undertaken by the human brain, which then has to torment itself with until now unknown and because of that rejected cosmic forces and energy quantums of unknown dimensions. The astral regions will once again be accessible for everyone, and new elements and ferments, a new biogenesis on sidereal principles, therefore a new heavens with a new astronomy and astrology, and a new earth with a new geosophy and tellurism will expect a new type of man, after the downfall of the old man  But the universal brotherhood knows by looking at the giant world clock, the sidereal zodiac, almost precisely the right spiritual moments coming in a few decades. the most favorable projection of a new
race of man, a higher developed type of man."

Unfortunately the exact nature of the "variety of inventions and discoveries" is not further explained or described, although we are left to assume that these were based on other principles than the known mechanical and empirical ones. And leaving that puzzling vista of magico-spiritual eugenics behind, which—as is clear from other passages not cited here—was influenced by Steiner and Blavatsky, but possibly also by Bulwer-Lytton, the writer leaps into cosmic distances. There, we learn, the sun and the planets are parts of the same thing; point and counterpoint; "one and the same ether, one of it has become positive— and is named the sun, the negative one is called the planet. Both are but one etheric globe, of which its center is the sun, its periphery the planet is called  The sun cannot exist in the absolute middle of the solar system, because of the opposition of the planets, who likewise want to be in its center. Since the universe can only exist in bi-central form, there is also no universal central body. It is there, but in the form of the sun and the planet. Only God is monocentral—the world is the bicentral god. God is the monocentral world. The behavior of the planets to the sun is one of a polar attraction and repulsion, power of the primal law in the solar system, power of light, of radiation. This attraction and repulsion is only possible, because the planet of its own force when it approaches the sun too close, in itself tilts from the negative to the positive pole—becoming the sun—and when it distances itself from the sun, it once again tilts the positive pole and nourished the negative pole in itself. And that is the cosmic motor!"43 the Pansophia lodge jubilantly declares.

With this occult vision of the solar system as one giant cosmic motor, the Pansophia lodge adhered itself to Keely's views on the earth's poles as being negative and positive, the polar and depolar force, the "interchange of polar and depolar sympathy" and "the sympathetic attractive, the force that draws the planets together," which was "the same that regulates the motion of the planets in their recession from each other." Aside from the uncanny similarity, we are left to muse—by absence of any reference to Keely in the publication of the Pansophia lodge—as to what degree the techno-magicians were aware of Keely's endeavors or in precisely what way they put this knowledge into practice.

It was the Fraternitas Saturni that evolved out of the Pansophia lodge, and which was an occult society that followed Crowley's doctrine to some extent, that definitely conducted experiments along those lines where technology and the occult meet. Although it is undisputed and historical fact that the order did so, very little is known about these researches. "Certainly one of the most unique aspects of Fraternitas Saturni magical technology," writes Flowers, "is (or was) its involvement with electrical instruments to enhance or to effect magical ends. This was part of a general field of interest among initiates of the Fraternitas Saturni, a field which included the study of, and experimentation with, the magical effects of high-frequency sound, electromagnetic fields, so-called 'Tesla energy,' ozoniation of the atmosphere, ultraviolet light etc." These experiments were put in a theoretical framework of teachings concerning "aethric waves," or the chakra system, thereby providing these with a magical basis.

As is clear from the writings of the Pansophia lodge, the foundation was already in place, and in that respect the research of the Fraternitas Saturni may be seen as a continuation of that tradition. Certainly, Germany had somehow survived the First World War, although not under the most favorable circumstances. But with its survival and the ensuing economic disorder, the occult substrata blossomed again into strange foliage.

That curious fusion of technology and occult lore also infected the German film industry and in some instances the fringes of fantastic literature. In 1916, during the height of the devastating world war, a six-part serial, Homunculus, was released, its theme relying heavily on Paracelsus' concepts of creating an artificial man and on Shelley's Frankenstein, which had received a reprint three years earlier by Altmann's publishing house. Coincidentally the same year that Frankenstein received its reprint, German filmer Paul Wegener came across that other ancient legend of the creation of an artificial man; the legend of the Golem, which led him to film the tale a number of times, in 1914, 1917 and in 1920.

The year 1919 saw the appearance of The Cabinet of Dr. Caligari, in which hypnosis, Mesmerism and somnambulism, so assiduously studied by the German occult milieus, played an integral part. A year later the Austrian magazine solely dedicated to fantastic and horror literature and one of the very first in the world, Der Orchideengarten or The Garden of Orchids, published a special issue consecrated to "the world call of the German electronic industry" as it stated on its first page. It did this in its own unique way. The special issue was titled Elektrodamonen or Electrodemons and it featured such tales as H.G. Wells, "Lord of the Dynamos," Hans Reisiger's "Elektrischer Sabbat" or "Electrical Sabbath" and Alf von Czibulka's "Das Wiehern in den Transformatoren" or "The Whirling in the Transformators." The tales were accompanied by weird etchings of machines and grotesque demons, which were melted into a bizarre configuration. A portfolio of drawings of Otto Muck, titled "Maschinen," was advertised in which he rendered machines and engines into a hybrid of biological and mechanical creatures, gifted with a strange semblance of life. The founder of one of the most striking magazines of the fantastic ever produced and that lasted only three years was Karl Hans Strobl, a then well-known writer of dark, unusual tales who had studied at the University of Bingen at the same time that Hugo Gernsback, who would become Tesla's friend, studied there. Also in 1920, the German film Algol was released in which an evil extraterrestrial entity from Algol, in occult lore known as the demon star, donates superior technology to an earthling, a machine with which one can become master of the world. In 1922, Nosferatu appeared in the German cinemas. The film superbly transformed Dracula, written by Bram Stoker, into a haunting play of light and shadow. The sets of Nosferatu were designed by Albin Grau, a leading member of the Fraternitas Saturni.And in 1926, the same year that the demise of the Pansophia lodge from the occult stage made way for its successor the Fraternitas Saturni, the magnificent Metropolis was released. In one of its more disturbing scenes, ancient magic and avant-garde science in unison create an artificial human in a laboratory filled with sparkling technology, but also a clearly visible upside-down giant pentagram.

Although not much is known about the researches of the Fraternitas Saturni, some light can be shed upon this matter by studying the beautifully printed issues of the official organ, the Saturn Gnosis. Its pages are riddled with terms as "electromagnetic fields" and "planetary spheres," "etheric planetary forces," "cosmic will" and "ether movements." We read of the etherwaves of the Weltgeist, a concept not unlike Mesmer's animal magnetism, which also appears in the writings of Bloomfield-Moore: "The word ether is from 'aitho,' to light up or kindle. According to Pythagoras and all the oldest philosophers, it was viewed as a divine luminous principle or substance, which permeates all things, and, at the same time, contains all things. They called it the astral light. The Germans call it the 'Weltgeist,' the breath of the father, the Holy Ghost, the life-principle." Expressionist trance studies of Atlantic and Saturn demons, an exposition of which was held in Berlin in 1931, stand side by side to references to the Akasha chronicles, pictures and articles on by-now familiar figures as Wronski, Levi, Paracelsus and Agrippa and comments on the writings of Jennings, Hartmann, Maack and Rudolf von Sebottendorff, the founder of the infamous Thule Society, which branched off the Germanen Order whose spiritual fathers were such men as Guido von List and Lanz von Liebenfels.

The initiates of the Fraternitas Saturni perceived man as an "electro-magnetic power plant," and electrolysis, electricity, ultraviolet, infrared, rontgen rays and radio activity are being discussed together with the magical concept of "radioactive electromagnetic space-force fields," which "through certain centers in man's etheric body and in the nerve system" make an exchange of "cosmic and human rays" possible.

The Fraternitas Saturni conducted its magico-technical rituals in order to create with their will "impulse waves, which reach into the cosmos. In their rhythmic change these will reach the electro magnetic force fields, not only reach, but in their radiation create from them." There are veiled allusions as to the magical technology involved in all this: "One can also see sacred cult ritual as cosmic physicism. First a concentration of energies in a suitable and chosen matter, such as in the most used cult devices, led, copper, silver, gold, which represent the chiefly magical metals. By word or vibration the atomic structure of these metals is set in motion. By the magnetic wailing the etheric radiation of the force motion is centralized, directed in a given direction, to achieve a binding to astral matter."

There are hints of the devices used in their curious techno-magical rituals and experiments through which "etheric rays may be assimilated and transformed." "Through the use of antennas built of copper, silver and gold—because of the motions of their electrons have a bigger absorption for cosmic rays—which are switched on through persons with a certain state of mind and through auto-suggestion."

Glimpses are given of other devices such as Korshelts' Solar ether Waves- Apparatus of which much of the technology apparently was derived, judging from the above and following descriptions, and a certain Dr. Eckhoff who invented devices which "through their spiral working of to opposite placed spirals," made out of an "extraordinary metal," provided the human body with "etheric rays," a process that he called "telesion. "

The author also tells how, "In our circles an engineer has constructed a copper spiral with 27 windings, the center of which is a copper bowl. An antenna is created thus, which is able to receive ethereal waves." The device apparently worked better when a person with "strong magnetic powers would radiate on it," and it is commented that "similar methods, although of a different kind, have given likewise results through the appliance of high frequency electricity, that go back to the research results of Nikola Tesla." It is also stated that "modern high frequency devices are being used."58 The concepts of "fields with crystalline structures that are short circuited whirlfields," "Euclidian-Newtonian-Galilean-Space-Time worlds," and "the giant organ of our starry worlds" are discussed, together with the "power currents of cosmic and mathematical structural laws, built on sound systems (Klangsysteme)" and "gravity potentials of electromagnetic and mechanical laws."



We learn of "primary suns and their force fields," the energy of which is "ultra energy in a total vacuum," and we are confided that "this central or primary solar field has a cellular structure with the possibilities of aggregation of the space-substance in its highest form." Then it is stated that, "The condition of this space-substance as fleeting electricity has, changes itself in the central solar field in a plus condition and— Vril."

And with this statement from the pages of the official organ of the Fraternitas Saturni the wheel has turned full cycle. Keely's visions of obtaining a force through the ether from the "very wheelworks of nature,"—an idea derived from the learned cabalist Pancoast and Nathan Loomis, linked to Bulwer-Lytton's vril-force—had traveled a long way, had crossed the fin de siecle with theosophy and had survived a devastating world war with anthroposophy. The original concepts had transmutated on each occasion when occult groups applied their wonderful ideas for their own quests. They surfaced again in Berlin of the interbellum, where the German Vril Society, another occult order or group obsessed with strange technology, fully allied itself with Bulwer-Lytton's vril ideology and Keely's discoveries and took its tenets to the very limit. Although the existence of a society by that name never was,61 the group as such did exist, but under a totally different name, and totally different from what modern mythology would want us to believe.

In 1930, the year that Surya's Moderne Rosenkreuzer went into its seventh edition, the last of the magical issues of the Fraternitas Saturni was issued and the magical order went underground, ultimately to be banned by the Nazi regime three years later, a little booklet of a mere 60 pages appeared under the imprint of the "Astrologische Verlag Wilhelm Becker," located at Schlosstrasse 59 in Berlin- Steglitz. This booklet bore the appropriate title Vril. Die Kosmische Urkraft. Wiedergeburt von Atlantis. The author chose to hide himself or herself under the pseudonym "Johannes Taufer." The publisher was an organization that named itself "Reichsarbeitsgemeinschaft Das Kommende Deutschland," whose headquarters were also located in Berlin, at the Pallastrasse 7.

A second booklet appeared the same year, also by the "Reichsarbeitsgemeinschaft" and titled Weltdynamismus, but issued by a different publishing house, Otto Wilhelm Barth Verlag. Both booklets referred to each other. It was this Reichsarbeitsgemeinschaft which would be the model for the legendary Vril Society. Peter Bahn, who can be credited with the discovery of the true identity of the Vril Society, found no clues as to the nature or origin of the group itself, and we learn little of the Reichsarbeitsgemeinschaft from their own description in their "Vril" booklet. But it is likely that this group was somehow a continuation of the Pansophia lodge or the Fratres Saturni. Since the Reichsarbeitsgemeinschaft left no clues it is now open to conjecture, but we may safely assume that at one time members of this group not only shared the same occult substratum in Berlin but also shared the same ideas on the fusion of technology and the arcane. A passage on Atlantis in the booklet of the Reichsarbeitsgemeinschaft that describes the Atlanteans as "psychophysical dynamotechnicians and not mechano-machin- ists" involuntary evokes the earlier cited shimmering visions of the Pansophia lodge: "...mankind will unriddle the secret of its existence through a variety of inventions and discoveries, through which those mechanic material, chemical-technical conjunctions will disappear into nothingness."

Not only that, they evoke the same passion for a search for alternative technology in the light of occult doctrine as demonstrated by a book that was also published in 1930, the same year that the booklets of the Reichsarbeitsgemein-schaft were published and Surya's book was reprinted. As Surya's book, the book was issued in Leipzig, the place where occult publisher Altmann resided. It was titled Verschollene Kulturen, or Hidden Cultures and written by Eugen Georg. In the ponderous tome Georg digressed on topics such as magic, the occult, Atlantis, Lemuria and Horbigers' Welteislehre, but also on the "cosmic propelling forces" and the proper use of solar, wind, tide, thermal and earth rotational energy. Explaining these topics, Georg confronts the reader with a multitude of terms as "metamechanical-organic," "energetic-metatechnical," "organic-technical" and "machine technical," "magia- technology" and "meta-technology." Amongst others, Georg cites as his sources the writings of Hartmann, Maack, Liebenfels, List, Levi, theosophist Scott-Eliott whose remarks on Keely we have read, and Surya's Moderne Rosenkreuzer. Georg also mentions Schappeller's space-force engine and vril several times in connection with Atlantis, like the Reichsarbeitsgemeinschaft would do the same year. One of Georg's conclusions was that to him magic is in fact technology, but with other means.

Here it is important to stop for a moment and study Surya's most puzzling book Moderne Rosenkreuzer or Modern Rosicrucians more deeply. For while its title might suggest a study on Rosicrucian topics of his day, in fact the book is quite different and, as is the case with Georg's Hidden Cultures, its contents clearly help define the occult surroundings in which the mysterious Reichsarbeitsgemeinschaft came into being.

The name G.W. Surya was a pseudonym; behind it hid the person Demeter Georgiewitz Weitzer (1873-1949). Weitzer knew Hartmann and wrote about Kellner's alchemical work in his "well equipped alchemical laboratory." Weitzer, or Surya as he choose to name himself, also belonged to the resurrected Rosicrucian occult sub- scene of his day and published a number of treatises on alternative medical science, astrology and Paracelsus. But it is with him that we may see how the German occultist-technicians were influenced by Keely.

In the pages of his book, Surya mentions Zanoni on several occasions, quotes Hartmann, discusses thought photography, Korschelt's devices, the Od-rays and the ether while using a single term that also appears in the writings of the Pansophia lodge and the Reichsarbeitsgemeinschaft: "Electricity is but a special form of the general cosmic energy. By and by science has arrived at Dynamism...for the ether is... the foundation of all electrical manifestations, but also matter!"

But the most curious and interesting part, presented in such a way that one is not sure whether the anecdote concerns actual incidents or a fictional account, involves the ship of a certain Lord E., called the Sirius. The ship, traveling more than twice as fast as "the best Lloyd steamboat" was "a hundred meters long and had four mighty funnels placed behind each other, which through their intervals, indicated that the boiler-rooms occupied one third of the length of the ship," Surya writes. The Sirius had double lining, watertight compartments and was equipped with two screws and a smaller rescue-vessel aboard, called Dependance of Sirius. His vessel has "its own machine," a powerful petroleum engine of 300 horsepower, but also a mysterious "additional machine," that Lord E. invented and similar to one that also propels the Sirius.

Mysterious as the additional machines may be, Lord E. nevertheless wishes to explain their working: "...five years ago I made wonderful discoveries during my experimental studies of the ether. You know my friend, that I have set it as my task to fathom the double sphinx of force and matter.  The speed that my additional machines, built on the ground of my discoveries and inventions, grant my Sirius. was for me a sublime moment, when my Sirius cleaved the waves,
propelled by 'Ether Force'  Never must mankind, in its current stage of development, obtain
these terrible forces that I have discovered."

Here Surya momentarily interrupts his account to insert a large note that occupies most of the page. "Compare The Secret Doctrine. The coming force," Surya hints in the note. And it is a hinting that he employs, for while he cites several lines from her chapter that delivered Keely's discoveries to the occult world, Surya, further digressing on the nature of the ether and also citing Tesla does not mention Keely, the central character of that particular chapter in The Secret Doctrine, although Surya would do so in another book.

We further learn from the mysterious Lord E. that, "In 1877 a German scientist had already penetrated the physics of the ether or in the secret of matter.. , and that two of the four funnels of his Sirius are camouflage, 'to divert curiosity,' and that his 'additional machines' are also called 'etheric machines'. So you see that the name 'additional machine' is also a kind of mask, so that I won't betray my principles during a conversation."

Finally a mere glimpse is offered on those etheric machines: "just somewhat above the water. two short bronze tubes with horizontal axles showed, similar to torpedo launching tubes, each with a diameter of 60 centimeters. From these a hurricane-like constant jet of air ejected." The bow of the ship had the same two tube-like appendages. "When I want to obtain a counter motion, the forward tubes will start working and the backward ones stop, that is, they will not obtain ether power anymore. Diagonal tubes, simultaneously switched on, turn the boat.  .. .This is everything that I will explain  How I obtain this enormous ether wave is my secret and it must stay that way. In order to obtain power I proportionally dematerialize a small amount of matter; 4-5 milligrams pro second for the two tubes. In reality a thousand explosions pro second take place, and this seems to us a constant stream."

What is left for Surya to remark is that Stefan Brandt, the protagonist through whom we learn of the existence of Lord E. and his ether-driven vessel, mutters that "the Atlanteans must have built their airships the same way." Indeed Lord E. confidently admits that this must be the case, and he in turn muses, "It would be easy to build a veritable airship with these forces. To build an airship of 25,000 kilos one only needs a tube with half the diameter of one of the reaction-tubes of my Sirius." But Lord E. leaves it at that, since "One who has traveled so far to self knowledge, will not be smitten down by arrogance, pride, the will to rule, just to play 'Master of the World' for a short time."

We will leave Surya's account of modern rosicrucian Lord E. here, and we are left to ponder upon his expression "Master of the World." For Jules Verne wrote a tale involving a powerful airship having that very title, and thus we are left in uncertainty if with this particular expression Surya provided a clue, meaning that he merely employed Vernean trickery, a fictionalized account, or wrote about a real incident involving a real person and having to do with real etheric engines. And although as we will see in the last chapter, the very mention of Verne might yield another explanation, we must also take into account that Surya's most singular book featured on its title page the subscript "an occult-scientific romance." Thus Surya more or less admitted to having employed the same literary procede as Bulwer-Lytton had done with his Zanoni and The Coming Race, that is, to divulge to the reader certain information, carefully hidden in what outwardly seems a fanciful tale, a work of fiction. As an afterthought we might remark that Surya's descriptions of the reaction-tubes of the Sirius somewhat resemble a certain passage in Greg's Across the Zodiac: ".. .1 went on deck  to examine the construction of the vessel. Her electric machinery drew in and drove out with great force currents of water which propelled her with a speed greater than that afforded by the most powerful paddles."

Surya's book also featured an advertisement on one of the last pages with the slogan "fight materialism!" that rallied any interested person to join a group called "Der Deutsche Neugeistbund," claiming that the group was "a member of the enormous chain of new spiritual movements which nowadays circumvent the globe," the Tibetan equivalent called "Swastika." Mention is made of "Ortsgruppen," or "local chapters" and the "Neugeist Centrale" or "New spirit central point." From the advertisement it is clear that some sort of neo-Rosicru-cian movement is meant: "Germany can only then be saved and made ready for a new rise when the world view of the Rosicrucians is lit over the soul of this country!" it exclaims.

Stripped of its choosing occult sides, it sounds similar to the ambitious plans of the 18th century Parisian magnetic freemasons to create "radiant healing centers" to promote Mesmer's techniques, and to the statements of the Reichsar-beitsgemeinschaft that labeled itself as "not political," claiming that "in every German city units are created" and stating that "knowing ones point the roads to the practical education of the Uranian radiant people." The question then is, did the Reichsarbeitsgemeinschaft belong to a hidden or largely kept underground tradition, having as its more important philosophical stations Mesmer, Reichen-bach, the Rosicrucians, Bulwer-Lytton and Keely? And were the plans of the


"Deutsche Neugeistbund" and the "Reichsarbeitsgemeinschaft Das Kommende Deutschland" part of a grandiose national or perhaps ultranational scheme or on the contrary quite competing in nature? Again, when we return to the writings of the "Reichsarbeitsgemeinschaft Das Kommende Deutschland," nothing in that respect is found. What the writings of the Pansophia lodge, the Fraternitas Saturni, Surya's and Georg's books do demonstrate, however, are the occult surroundings in which these philosophies matured and that gave birth to the elusive Reichsarbeitsgemeinschaft .

About the booklets of the Reichsarbeitsgemeinschaft, Bahn aptly remarks that "not one word is being said about Bulwer-Lytton and his novel The Coming Race, although the connection of the term 'Ubermensch' and the display of vril as a powerful energy reminds one about the description of the Vril-ya in Bulwer-Lytton's novel." We may add such an omission also applies for the curious vision of the coming new race of man that the Pansophia lodge had printed five years before in the same city. Bahn also points out that "in the writings of the Reichsarbeitsgemeinschaft remarks on such other societies as the Thule society lack completely, and the group seems to have had a positive attitude towards Christianity, a clear difference from the most volkische- esoteric movements with affinities to National Socialism," neither are such references found in the writings of Pansophia, Fratres Saturni or Surya.

We can further conclude that, aside from having seen how Surya hinted at Keely by pointing towards Blavatsky's chapter, nowhere in the writings of the Reichsarbeitsgemeinschaft is Keely or his discoveries mentioned. There is a connection between the latter two, however frail. Not surprisingly, this link is to be found in early theosophy. The German publisher, Wilhelm Becker—who issued the first booklet of the mysterious German group—belonged to the leading German astrological scene long before World War I. Becker stayed in London for several years as a student of Alan Leo (1860-1917), one of the most important astrologists of late Victorian England. Initiated and prepared by Leo, Becker opened up a flourishing astrologer's shop in Berlin in 1910.

Leo was introduced to theosophical gatherings led by Blavatsky in London in 1889 by Sepharial, yet another influential astrologer. The following May, Leo formally joined the Theosophical Society and remained a devoted member for the rest of his life. His membership overlapped briefly with that of William Butler Yeats, who resigned the same year to become a member of the Golden Dawn. The co-founder of the Golden Dawn, William Wynn Westcott, was a colleague of Sepharial in Blavatsky's Inner Circle that only counted 12 members. Of Leo it was said that he was "a serious and hard working man," who never read many books except Raphael's Guides and Blavatsky's Isis Unveiled and The Secret Doctrine with all the references to Keely. These books he studied "seriously." There is circumstantial evidence that shows something of the range of his occult interests; in the writings of his wife, Bessie Leo, one encounters the terms Mesmerism and animal magnetism. There are other connections; in an occult magazine published by Otto Wilhelm Barth who also published the second booklet of the mysterious Reichsarbeitsgemeinschaft, the official organ of the Pansophia lodge was announced.

The Reichsarbeitsgemeinschaft, who conveniently chose to publish their booklet with Becker's and Barth's publishing houses, saw the earth as having "the same structure as an apple sliced vertically in two halves." As Keely saw half a century before them, and what was termed the cosmic motor by the Pansophia lodge in accordance with Keely's views, the group saw in the north pole the anode, or positive, and in the south pole of the magnetic axis the cathode, or negative. From this, the Reichsarbeitsgemeinschaft drew certain technical and physical conclusions for the usage of vril-energy, which it also called "the all-force of the forces of nature." Certain devices, described as "ball shaped power generators" would "channel the constant flow of free radiant energy between outer space and the earth" and would enable a "specific use" of this energy.

These ball-shaped devices, in which two bar-shaped magnets stuck, were conceived as small "world globes." In the interior of such a device was the "electrovital filling mass," and through an impulse a "grounded earth element" would be activated and electrically charged. The energy thus created could be tapped and could be used to drive engines. The used energy would be renewed through the grounding of the earth force field, the voltage in the ball aggregate would remain the same, and Balm concludes that "we deal here with a sort of converter for radiation energy." The impulse however was given through radio technical means by a so-called "primal machine." Only one on the whole of the earth was needed. Here the Reichsarbeitsgemeinschaft becomes suitably vague in its description; the "primal machine" is described as a configuration of seven ball-shaped cells, but nothing more is said about its exact function.

How then does all of this tally with Keely's visionary concepts? In order to establish this and by any absence of reference to Keely—except for Surya's hint—we must follow strange trails, and take into account that the techno-magi-cians of the Reichsarbeitsgemeinschaft possibly meant that the description of the primal machine was to be taken as a metaphor, or else their ideas on technology were so avant-garde in concept that these traversed the boundaries of the material and space-time. For as an echo of that age-old Indian cyclical doctrine that would lead to the perpetuum mobile, 19th century theosophical literature of influence speaks of "seven globes" that "form the field of our system of development. Our earth is the fourth globe in this chain. Around this chain of worlds the life-wave travels seven times and this traverse is called a Manvantara."

These and other theosophical concepts proved so powerful that a contemporary of the Reichsarbeitsgemeinschaft, theosophist and astrologer A.C. Libra saw the planetary system as one "etheric body," in which the sun, the planets, the moons and the comets are "the material organs or the centers of power." That idea sounds remarkably similar to that of the Pansophia lodge who saw the solar system as "one ether globe," and the occult order of the Fratres Saturni who held it that "our starry worlds" are in fact "one giant organ." Libra's books were published by the same company that issued the book by Dutch astrologer and theosophist Thierens, whose thoughts on Keely's supposed psychic ability we encountered in chapter 7.

Libra was well read in Germany and could therefore be another influence to the Reichsarbeitsgemeinschaft or perhaps the techno-alchemists and occultists of the Pansophia lodge and the Fratres Saturni. Also, we must not forget how one of the booklets of the Reichsarbeitsgemeinschaft was issued by publisher Becker who specialized in astrology, and the other by publisher Barth, who in his occult magazine devoted a laudatory article to Libra's books.

Much in the style of the Pansophia lodge, Libra also explains that according to him, the sun emitted ether rays, "called prana by the old Indian adepts," which were transformed on the planets into light and heat. The driving force of the cosmos is "the centrifugal electric solar force," which is in balance with the resistance of the center-searching magnetic currents of space. "In the same manner," Libra continues, "the heart of every micro-chasm is the sun of this world in miniature." The heart is, according to Libra, the cave of Bethlehem in which the godly spark, Christ, is being born.

Steiner, too, undoubtedly exerted his influence on the doctrine of the Reichsarbeitsgemeinschaft. In 1908, he gave a cycle of 12 lectures about the apocalypse of St. John. The number 12 was significant because it was also the number of the houses of the zodiac. In the third and fourth lectures—which added together form the number seven—Steiner digressed on "John's letter to the seven communities in Asia," and on "the unveiling of the seven seals." If all this number dissecting sounds as if too much is being made of mere coincidences, that indeed might be the case. On the other hand it is a well-documented fact that to a learned occultist, a high initiate, there is no such thing as coincidence and the slightest detail might be the cache that holds an important message. After all, the symbolism and meaning of numbers and measures are of the greatest importance to occult doctrine. Steiner also made it clear to his audiences that "in the occult.. .one never has expressed himself clearly, but has created something that should conceal the true nature."

Thus, according to Steiner, the contents of an initiation and the prophecy of the cycles of the development of mankind in which he had adorned Keely with a brilliant role are carefully hidden in the apocalypse of St. John. The importance that Steiner saw in the apocalypse of St. John, and Libra's writings on the godly spark, help to explain the pseudonym of "Johannes Taufer" or "John Baptist"— the biblical figure who baptized Jesus—that the author of the booklet Vril. Die Kosmische Urkraft chose. Reading how Libra informs us of the essence of "cosmic man," with "seven nerve- centers that correspond with certain zodiacal signs," sheds perhaps some light on the hidden meaning of the phrase "Uranian radiant people." Also, a year after Steiner's lectures, a New York theosophical publisher issued a book that purports to be the real message according to St. John. In it we read that the term "radiance" denotes "the luminous cloud or aura enveloping the purified man or Initiate, and which is visible only to the inner sight."

Perhaps amidst all this we glimpse the real symbolism of the primal machine of the Reichsarbeitsgemeinschaft: the primal machine is man itself. Man that has evolved and has become truly the fulfillment of itself, only one on the face of the earth is needed, man as a brilliant embodiment of the cosmic motor. Possibly with this metaphorical interpretation we also perceive what Keely ultimately foresaw with his line of research that would enable him to link his devices to the waves of the brain, what Steiner was driving at in his 1918 lecture, or how it came to be that Blavatsky explained Keely as one who was paranormally gifted. We may even venture so far as to think twice of the apparent symbolism of the street number of the address of the Reichsarbeitsgemeinschaft in Berlin, which was seven. There is another slight reference in Libra's writing that helps us to follow the hidden trail and chart the occult substrata; while digressing on the meaning of the zodiac, Libra refers to Burgoyne's The Light of Egypt.

Burgoyne, who we met in the previous chapter, was heavily influenced by Bulwer- Lytton. Bulwer-Lytton's intriguing concept of vril was a major influence on Blavatsky, who in turn became a friend of Bloomfield-Moore and one of the most prominent occultists to write about Keely. Steiner was also impressed by the writings of learned initiate Bulwer-Lytton and had studied Blavatsky's writings. He lectured on Keely and even stated what he held as the real nature and significance in his Mystery Plays. In his third lecture on the apocalypse of St. John, entitled "a letter to the seven communities," Steiner alleged that a certain community is a representative of the sixth time-period (Steiner thought there were seven), a time-period in which mankind's spiritual life is being prepared. Amazingly, or perhaps not, since all could be a matter of coincidence, the name of this community is Philadelphia, the place where Keely lived.

Bulwer-Lytton's concept of vril was also a major influence on the philosophies of the Fratres Saturni, and it is almost too convenient that the year that the Fraternitas Saturni went underground, the Reichsarbeitsgemeinschaft made itself publicly known. The former, evolving from the Pansophia lodge, could therefore very well have provided the latter with a legacy of inspiration, sharing as they did the same geographic locale and in all probability the same occult substratum. Bahn however points towards another and almost certain source of the ideas of the Reichsarbeitsgemeinschaft. "Everything mat the Reichsarbeitsgemeinschaft stated in 1930 on the subject of 'primal force,' the 'primal machine' and 'ball-shaped aggregates' stated, was already published two years before in a book about the 'Raumkraft' or space force-theory by the Austrian inventor Karl Schappeller."

Schappeller (1875-1947) is certainly one of the most mysterious persons of the 20th century free-energy scene. It is alleged that his work on free-energy philosophy started around 1894. This coincidentally was the year that both Colville's and Astor's books were published in America, Pape discovered his life-wave in Holland, in France the Golden Dawn opened a temple, and Zanne started to rewrite history to fit his occult insight.

Information about Schappeller's early years is hard—if not impossible—to obtain, and we can only speculate to what degree he was influenced by Keely. It is possible that a certain connection existed between Keely and Schappeller; Schappeller stayed in Vienna in the 1920s where he undoubtedly would have mingled with the esoteric coterie surrounding occult neo-templarist Liebenfels, who in turn was connected to Hartmann. And three decades before Schappeller's arrival in Vienna, a Viennese paper published several articles about Keely, and Bloomfield-Moore visited that city and was questioned about her support of Keely. Whatever the influence of ideas that might have resulted from such connections, Shappeller's ideas themselves show a remarkable similarity to those that Keely had half a century before him.

In Vienna, Schappeller collected a menage, many of whom where young engineers. He developed new ideas on the suppliance of energy and found financial backers, even in industrial and clerical circles. In 1925, he bought an old castle in his hometown of Aurolzmunster, where he led a luxurious lifestyle that often brought him in financial difficulties. While this led to a negative image, his labors at the castle were of a different nature. There he had Franz Wetzel, one of the leading radiestesists of his time, amongst his co-operators. Schappeller also received financial backings from industrial companies such as the Siegerlan-der industrialist Fritz Klein, and through middlemen from the German emperor Wilhelm II, living in exile in Holland.

An English shipping company was interested in Schappellers "Raumkraft" aggregates, and at one time conducted serious negotiations about a ship's engine that was to be derived from his "Raumkraft" aggregates, evoking Surya's anecdote of Lord E.'s ether-driven vessels, the Sirius and the Dependence of Sirius. Schappeller's wanderings during the Second World War are uncertain, and indications on the use of his research are completely lacking. When he died, all of his research papers and documents disappeared," and it is asserted that, as a strange and haunting echo of Steiner's remarks, certain interested parties and international control aspects made every effort to banish Schappeller's ideas and plans on his energy-converter from the pages of history.

Schappeller considered the primal force as "that which holds the earth in its inner together," a statement remarkably similar to Keely's, and Newbrough's for that matter. Schappeller stated that "in the whole of nature, there is no nothing, no useless space. Where there is no matter, there is energy, a so called empty space is therefore a space filled with force  Space controlling is energy, space filling is matter. Because
the cosmos is a closed vacuum, it is an immense space of energy." This line of thought is analog to that of Belinfante when he wrote 23 years before Schappeller that "space between the heavenly bodies is filled with ether," or in fact any other ether- theorist.

Schappeller's aim was to create a "constant discharge" between the cosmos and earth, which he considered to be a reservoir of force, and the cosmos. Since the word "plasma" was still unknown at the time that he conducted his experiments and formulated his theories, he called a similar phenomenon "electrical vapor," "luminous magnetism" or "luminous ether." The use of the dynamic principles of the ether led to the construction of a ball-shaped device in which the "luminous magnetism" was created that could be held permanently and was used as the conductor between the earth and the cosmos.

Schappeller's device resembled a miniature earth and was built from two precisely calculated half globes with the hulls consisting of magnetic parts with an inner room built of a nonmagnetic diaphragm. Inside this globe were two magnetic poles of a "certain shape." Connected to these poles were thin tubes, filled with an "electrical mass." The tubes, separated from the inner hull of the globe through an isolating substance, were configured in a number of closely wound spirals. The "electrical mass" with which the tubes were filled consisted of a substance that was partly wax. These tubes were then "permanently electrified" and were connected with a pole to the grounding.

The second pole originated in the middle of the globe, which was filled with an "electrostatical mass" that was Schappeller's secret. When energy was taken from the globe it recharged itself continuously in the same quantities. The globe was fixed to some kind of "magnetic arm" that was called the "rotor," while the globe itself was called the "stator," although this unusual device had no moving parts. When the globe was charged and switched on, a magnetic needle reacted on the north and south pole similar to the actual north and south poles of the earth. Switched off, the globe was magnetically neutral. It is alleged that a globe of only 15 cm diameter delivered an astounding high number of kilowatts. The "luminous ether" regenerated itself and only dissolved when the globe was opened. The filling of the globe was done by a special "filling machine" of which unfortunately no technical drawings or specific descriptions exist.

Interestingly, a 1930s German esoteric magazine with ariosophic leanings published an article by Schappeller and referred to Liebenfels in connection with Schappeller, thus giving more substance to the possibility that Schapeller indeed rubbed shoulders with the coterie surrounding this dark initiate while in Vienna, or that both parties were at least aware of each other. Liebenfels studied The Secret Doctrine very well, and perhaps thus a trail leads back through time and geography to John Keely in Philadelphia.

The article did not mention Keely but lamented that Schappeller and Liebenfels were neglected researchers, as was Frenzolf Schmid, it pointed out. Schmid succeeded, so the article goes, with the help of a device of his making to divide the cosmic rays in its three components. These were the "primal rays" or "death rays," the "pure rays" or "healing rays," and "primal additional rays" or "indifferent rays." In 1929, Schmid published two booklets about his invention and claimed that with his device he was able to use any of these rays as he liked, for instance as a healing method, like Keely had claimed almost half a century before him.

Liebenfels was quite aware of Schmid's exploits, as he wrote on a number of occasions about Schmid and his curious invention. They also added more weight to his own strange philosophy: "Add to this as another important fact the discovery of Frenzolf Schmid, according to which light is broken down in three rays, primal or death rays, life rays, indifferent rays (or, as I call them, carrier or isolating rays).  ...Frenzolf Schmid has, with this discovery, established scientifically my thesis on the trinity. The primal rays correspond with the 'father,' the healing rays with the 'son,' the indifferent rays with the 'holy spirit,' that by means of isolation and direction steer the other rays." And elsewhere Liebenfels extols the virtues of a treatment with one of Schmid's devices for the healing of disease, while treating one of Schmid's publications on the subject.

Clearly, as so many of the 1920s European occult milieus, Liebenfels was quite taken with inventions and discoveries that involved cosmic rays and stupendous energies. In his writings the terms "Urkraft" or "Primal Force" and ether crop up, again suggesting at least a common origin with Schappellers' inventions and Keely's discoveries.

Liebenfels also uses such metaphors as "the radio broadcast station" for God, evoking the ideas of Dutch grail seeker Rensburg. Rensburg, who like Liebenfels admitted his indebtedness to The Secret Doctrine, wrote on the communication of man with godlike beings as "inter-astral telepathy, that is, marconigraphy of an organical nature, from their nerve system directly to our nerve system...," further explaining that "as long as there existed religion on earth, meaning the connection with the gods, this was never anything else than inter-astral telepathy. "109 But with gods, Rensburg does not mean the same gods as those that feature in Liebenfels' dark blend of Wotanism and Christianity: Rensburg muses on "organical marconigraphy from star to star" and on "material beings on other stars that exert their influence on us through telepathy, soon amplified by means of inter-astral radiography."

Enough is said here of Rensburg's highly original but today totally forgotten writings, in which he refers to Golden Dawn initiate Waite, to Edgar Rice Burroughs' Mars Novels and to Jules Verne, and who ponders on the possibility of life on the sun and of metals, of which "it is proven that they have feelings," in turn evoking Keely's ideas on "a crazy piece of metal." As brilliant and unusual a thinker as Rensburg was, he would pursue his ideas further and thereby also quote the writings of the dark Viennese initiates List and Liebenfels. But as a horrible irony of history, Rensburg, who was Jewish, died in 1943 in a Nazi deathcamp, such focal points of unimaginable suffering being partly the result and the culmination of the racist ideas of the ariosophical initiates Liebenfels and List.

Returning to Liebenfels' writings, we find citations taken from Zanoni, and his thoughts on inventions such as the "Atomedium," "a sort of automatic dowser (or pendulum) that partly corroborates the discoveries of Reichenbach and de Rochas"111 or of the discovery that "the human blood emits rays that is capable to dissolve hydrogensuperoxyd."112 But whereas in these writings of Liebenfels the name Keely is nowhere mentioned, it is safe to assume that me dark initiate
from Vienna also had been keenly aware of Keely's discoveries. Liebenfels was heavily influenced by The Secret Doctrine, and he knew Hartmann, who visited Keely on a number of occasions, moreover his particular frame of mind where avant-garde technology and the occult sciences meet makes an interest in Keely's discoveries quite obvious.

To what extent Liebenfels was involved in the case of Schappeller remains uncertain, as in the case of another contemporary Austrian inventor, Victor Schauberger. Around the time that Schappeller was working on his space-force machines, Schauberger claimed to have developed an astounding device that he named the Implosion Turbine. Water was pumped in a spiral-shaped tube in which it then imploded. This drove the pump and converted it into an electrical motor. Schauberger mentioned the existence of an "all pervading fifth element, Aether." Although much has come to light in recent years concerning Schauberger, as with Keely's and Schapeller's devices the whereabouts of Schauberger's machines— which were shipped to the United States after the Second World War—still remain unknown and he too seems to have been the victim of an interested party with international control aspects.113 In recent years, researchers have noted the similarity between the theories of Keely and Schauberger.

We have tasted something of the very troubling and bothersome aspect that plagued those early occult pursuers of unorthodox rays, Keely, Schappeller, Schauberger and other free-energy inventors: that uncertain and dark corner which perhaps was the same that Steiner alluded to in his lecture, and has been named "an interested party with international control aspects" by one author. It is obvious that this unidentified current was much more powerful than any of the occult and esoteric societies that surrounded these free-energy inventors. Its frightening aspects led Jacques Bergier to theorize about a secret organization that he suggestively called "the men in black," that has always accompanied every progress of mankind during the ages and therefore also the endeavors of those free-energy inventors, something that the theosophists and again Steiner already warned about. Bahn speculates on the absence of publications of the mysterious Reichsarbeitsgemeinschaft after 1930—that perhaps this group in itself was meant as a front organization, as, except from their identity, they never really cared much for secrecy: "clearly the Reichsarbeitsgemeinschaft Das Kommende Deutschland was not a secret society. It published its philosophies with two relatively known publishing companies and it recruited for members in its pamphlets with an address that anybody could find."

But of the Reichsarbeitsgemeinschaft as being a front organization, Bahn states that it is "Not to be excluded, although on the other hand not proven...the Reichsarbeitsgemeinschaft could have been a front organization of an occult circle, whatever it called itself, that really operated in hiding and observed and filtered potentially interested by means of the Reichsarbeitsgemeinschaft, before they were admitted to the inner core. ...The division between the 'secret order' and front organization possibly created a double protection; against unsavory characters...and against repression from the state, that was taken on by the front organization and thus diverted from the inner core." That after 1930 no other publications were issued by the Reichsarbeitsgemeinschaft could mean, according to Bahn, that "the group did not attain the resonance that they hoped for." Could the Reichsarbeitsgemeinschaft have been the last brilliant ploy to either promote or employ the same principles that Keely discovered more than half a century before? Was Steiner's first Goetheaneum at one time the place where certain initiates conducted strange experiments in the fashion of Keely's discoveries? Unfortunately, such lines of thought and the questions that they yield are until this point quite unverifiable.

Whatever the causes, the reasons or the motives, nowhere does one come across so many instances of patents, papers, documents, technical drawings, devices and inventions that have gone mysteriously missing after the often sudden, unexplainable and sinister deaths or disappearances of persons than in the history of the search for alternative energy sources. That, too, is a historical fact, even though a sad and frightening one, even if one wants to ignore or downplay this, depending on the point of view taken on history in general.

Relatively recently a warning as to this frightening aspect was issued,118 and elsewhere two examples of inventors who disappeared under never-resolved circumstances are offered. There is the case of John Andruss, who claimed that he found a method of making petrol from water by adding a special liquid to it. His disappearance has never been solved. Apparently both the British and the U.S. governments were sufficiently impressed by his claims and even set up a joint panel of experts to study his work. "Finally, the stage was reached when a tank of a motor-boat was filled with water, and Andruss poured into it a glass of his secret composition. Selected men were in the boat and it is stated that it roared out over the waters of a lake near New York. A final test was to be made on the speedway at Indianapolis; but on the morning of the (successful) test, Andruss did not turn up. From that day in 1925, until this, not a trace of him has ever been found."

The second example is the case of German mechanical genius Rudolf Diesel, who "on the night of 29 December, 1913, eight months before the outbreak of the First World War, sailed with the Harwich steamer from Antwerp." He never reached Harwich, and his nonarrival and what happened to him remains a mystery to this day.

Webb states that, if there is any truth in the dictum that occultists have a special relationship with the imagination in their pursuit of other realities, we might find an extraordinary amount of creative work in, for instance, the realms of mechanical invention.121 He includes such people as Hugo Gernsback who coined the word "television" and the term "science fiction" and Austrian Hans Horbiger, the strange prophet of the Welteislehre that became the official cosmogony in Nazi Germany.

But as we have seen in many instances, this creativity went far beyond common mechanical invention and stretched itself into those planes of existence where they felt that like Keely they could touch and measure the very stars, where wonderful rays, cosmic energies and primal forces were the rule: where man is not simply made out of flesh and blood alone but is also a creature that is, like the surrounding universe, a source of radiant energy, a power plant of unimaginable possibilities who holds the promise of becoming godlike in the end.