# 理解艺术：基利的发现 

7 To Understand the Art Keely's Discoveries

"My system, in every part and detail, both in the developing of this power and in every branch of its utilization, is based and founded on sympathetic vibration."

Keely in, Keely's Secrets, T.P.S., 1888

"In the course of his long career Keely may have broken a number of laws, but he left the first and second laws of thermodynamics, which forbid perpetual motion machines, inviolate. "

New Encyclopedia Brittanica, 1981

There were two periods in Keely's research and experiments. The first period that ran from 1874—or possibly earlier—involved the production of force by the disintegration of water, which was later called etheric vapor. This he accomplished with his Liberator, and we have several accounts that serve as an illustration of his experimental activities during that time. It was explained that "the etheric vapor was obtained by letting the water into the Disintegrator or Liberator at a certain pressure. There were certain chambers which it must enter first, and there were certain valves which were opened or closed next."

A recent and more detailed suggestion of this procedure is that his hydro pneumatic pulsating vacuum engine, built at the very beginning of the first period, worked by using the infinite pressures developed from water hammer and cavitation, also referred to as implosion. The circuit of vibration energy in his Disintegrator engine could be compared to today's signal generators and synthesizers. Its aim was to disintegrate water into etheric vapor.2 Glocker, who constructed both this engine and the multiplicator, described the hydro pneumatic pulsating vacuo machine as having cylinders of 3-inch bore and 3-inch stroke, with a fly wheel of 200 pounds weight, that was able to revolve at 300 revolutions per minute.

The etheric vapor, also called vaporic substance, that Keely discovered by accident while experimenting with his hydro pneumatic pulsating vacuo machine in 1873,4 was a most mysterious substance with almost legendary attributes. It was this etheric vapor that could drive a train of cars from Philadelphia to New York and propel a steamer across the Atlantic without fuel or sails, and could be obtained from a handful of water. "People have no idea of the power of water," Keely said, "a bucket of water has enough of this vapor to produce a power sufficient to move the world out of its course."

The vapor had no smell or taste. Collier claimed that he frequently inhaled it without any perception of smell or taste. When he put a candle to it, the substance would not burn and did not smother its flame; "there was no heat about it—no galvanism— no electricity—no chemicals—no preparation of any kind excepting the mechanical appliances."

Sergeant, who had also handled the vaporic substance, claimed that it was "pleasant to the touch," and furthermore he had "swallowed all I could get of Keely's vapor, and I find it is pleasant. You can live on it.  It turns back to water, and water that I can drink."

Expressing his amazement of the vaporic substance, Babcock mused that, "Comparing it with steam it is as different in action as it is opposite in origin. Steam is derived from heat or combustion, and so may be said to have a chemical origin; the vapor is a production of mechanical action, a spontaneous energy. Vibration, whether considered as an energy or a motion, is an inherent property or concomitant of matter, and therefore spontaneous."

While this new and strange substance was heralded as a new source of untold power, and it could be won from water of which there was plenty, it was also sourly noted that statements about the etheric vapor were vague, consisting more of what it was not than of what it was. This, of course, would "hardly do for an adequate description of a new 'vaporic substance' of immense power, which is capable of rendering steam a thing of the past."

The second period in Keely's research ran from 1882 until he died. He had for 10 years demonstrated the liberation of the energy on which he "stumbled over," while experimenting on vibrations in 1872. His efforts to construct a perfect engine failed. He explained that he made "the mistake of pursuing his researches on the line of invention instead of discovery; all his thoughts were concentrated in this direction up to the year 1882." Frequently, explosions occurred and he scrapped engine prototypes and sold their remains as old metal in his constant failures to construct an engine that would keep up the rotary motion of the ether.

In this period of constant frustration, Keely discovered a force derived from the vibration of an unknown fluid or substance, locked between the atoms of the ether. This he called the vibratory force11 or the etheric force. It was this force that he claimed was not like steam, electricity, compressed air or galvanism.12 While during the first period he obtained the force through the disintegration of water, in the second period he could develop his force "in the air, in a vacuum, in the ether itself,"13 or by the vibrating of hydrogen, which he first attempted around 1884 on the suggestion of Bloomfield-Moore.

That year, he confided to a reporter that, "Stripping the process of all technical terms, it is simply this: I take water and air, two mediums of different specific gravity and produce from them by generation an effect under vibrations that liberates from the air and water inter atomic ether. The energy of this ether is boundless and can hardly be comprehended. The specific gravity of the ether is about four times lighter than that of hydrogen gas, the lightest gas so far discovered." The vibratory force was produced by vibrations of the ether that "pervades the universe," and he claimed that these were so rapid, "like those attributed to light, that no cognizance can be taken of them by human sense." Objects which were "vitalized" or synchronized so as to vibrate in the ether in a certain definite relation to each other would together exert a force which, "if it can be applied the everyday business of life," would "supersede all other forms of energy, and at practically no cost..."

Until 1888, Keely pursued "the wrong line of research," still trying to construct a "perfect engine" that could hold the ether in "a rotating ring of etheric force." Towards the end of 1888, he entirely abandoned his concept of the "perfect machine." Up to this time he practically built his research equipment himself. Then around 1888, he was to be provided with "the best instruments that opticians could make for him after the models or designs which he furnished."17 Around 1890, he also made the remarkable statement that he succeeded in linking his machines on the polar current, "sympathetically," by sensitizing his devices "as to be able to operate the machinery from that force." This polar current was described as magnetic currents that envelop the earth as "an orange is in its rind." Keely claimed that his force was the result of an interference with this magnetic rind.18 He later stated that "the polar forces included magnetism, electricity and gravital sympathy; each stream composed of three currents, or triune streams, which make up the governing conditions of the controlling medium of the universe  These sympathetic streams from celestial space, percussing on the dense atmospheric environment of our earth by their infinite velocities, wrest from their atomic confinement the latent energies which we call heat and light."

The machines that Keely built during his first period were of "megalithic proportions—one weighing 22 tons." Most were implemented by the Atlantic Works and the Delaware Iron Works of Philadelphia, and were scrapped in turn as they were superseded by smaller, more sophisticated models.

His Generator of 1878, "undoubtedly the strongest mechanism in the world," as Babcock mused, weighed about three tons and would stand "freely in a space five feet long and high by two feet wide." It contained small spherical chambers, "mathematically differentiated in size," connected vertically by "tubular processes of iron, and irregularly by smaller ones of copper. One quart of water fills all the chambers and tubes intended to be filled." The Generator, upright in position, had five distinct parts or columns, called the central column, two side columns, and the front and back stand-tubes. The stand-tubes, although similar in appearance, were opposite in action. The two side columns were alike. The central or main column was larger than the other four combined, and was "more complex in structure." Air was water-locked in some of the chambers and tubes, where, "by its elasticity, introductory impulses" were given to the water when "the equilibrium" was disturbed. This disturbance was effected by the movement of an outside lever operating a four-way valve within. There were no other metallic movements inside, except the working of three independent valves. The apparatus was therefore considered "practically without wear and not liable to get out of order."

The Generator used but one quart of water to produce 54,000 pounds per square inch pressure. "No heat, electricity, or chemicals were used. ...Output remained constant regardless of work effected." Babcock stated that he "has had to use tons of metal where others required only pounds." The Generator was one of two mechanisms that Keely built during this period, the other being the engine. The Generator produced the force that the engine used, and these two devices were what is commonly referred to as the Keely motor. The vaporic substance was the medium of the force that it carried.

During the second period, the miniaturization of his engines continued for a considerable degree. The Generator was a structure six feet long and correspondingly wide and high, "...which resulted in the production of a machine in 1895 not so large as a lady's round work table which he named a Liberator. Continuing his labor of evolution, within one year, he made astonishing progress.. .combining the production of the power, and the operation of the cannon, his engine and his Disintegrator in a machine no larger than a dinner plate, and only three or four inches in thickness. This instrument was completed in 1886."24 When he began experimenting with his discovery of another principle—which was one of the reasons the Keely Motor Company took him to Court—his engines became even smaller in size: "and the size of the instrument used now, in 1888, for the same purposes is no larger than an old-fashioned silver watch, such as we see in Museum collections."

Another explanation for the miniaturization of his engines was his utilization of the new technology: "Before discarding the use of water in the production of his force, twelve 'generators' were constructed varying in weight from 175 pounds up to 34,000 pounds, with a 'receiver' weighing 7,000 additional and by which he was able to develop the enormous power of 30,000 pounds to the square inch. For this 'generator' seven or eight engines were constructed, with varying success in their operation. They all would 'run,' but not to the satisfaction of this indefatigable worker. At last, about four years ago, the discovery was made that air alone was better than the combined air and water employed before. This at once resulted in the important changes in the mechanism. The clumsy Generator of several tons weight gave place to the lighter Liberator. Of these, three have been constructed, each one more slight than its predecessor, until that at present in his laboratory weighs less than 150 pounds, while the inventor has in process


of construction the fourth and last one, which 'is a perfect machine of its kind,' weighing less than seventy-five pounds, and with which he expects to produce a greater force than has ever before been shown."26 Between 1872 and 1887, no less than 124 different machines or engines had been constructed in experimenting with one Liberator.

In his productive career, Keely built between 129 and 2,000 experimental devices, but as far as is known, never built more than one of each. This enormous number was reached because of the special requirements that he had; his engines needed a perfect construction, and if a device possessed but one little unevenness or imbalance, he considered the engine worthless. One of the reasons for this was that he worked with enormous pressure forces. In his search for perfection, vast sums of money were expended on machines which sometimes were never used: one device cost $40,000, but was rejected because he claimed there was "a flaw in it." He "thought nothing of spending $20,000 for a piece of machinery, and a few weeks afterwards throwing it aside as useless." Other devices were made of special metal alloys; his Generator was made of Austrian gun metal "in one solid piece." It would hold about ten or twelve gallons of water and was four or five inches thick, made "to handle the very heavy pressure of 20,000 to 30,000 pounds of vapor to the square inch." Other parts were made of welded iron, "of great thickness and strength."

Then there were the adjustments made on the machinery, which was a difficult affair; "When it is considered that Keely experimented with 129 machines during his career as an inventor, and that one after another of these was made to special measurements, to be thrown into the scrap-pile...Many of these machines called for the most delicate adjustment and the most consummate skill of the artisan."

Although Keely constructed and built his engines himself at first, he was later supplied with "the best instruments and devices for research that opticians and other skilled makers could produce, after models or designs which he furnished." Parts of his later devices were made by various companies like LP. Morris's Richmond Iron Works, the Atlantic Works, the Delaware Iron Works at New Castle, Delaware, and at an unspecified company in Hartford, Connecticut, where "two immense wheels of copper tubing" had been made at "enormous cost.'" Keely's proposed "new and large 250 horsepower engine was constructed by Newsham & Co. in Philadelphia,36 and LP. Morris's Richmond Iron Works made 'many pieces of apparatus for Keely.'" He spent much time at the Iron Works, putting the parts of his engines together himself.37 During this early period he was trying to get a powerful receiver, and LP. Morris made him a cast steel shell about 24 inches in diameter and 30 inches high which was capable of sustaining a pressure of 25,000 pounds. "It was cast in halves, flanged and bolted together, the bolts being placed quite close to one another. The joint was made with lead, through which the bolts run. " However, when this enormous pressure was "put upon it, the water which it contained fairly foamed as it came through the joint, looking like milk; it even came through the pores of steel, although it was three inches in thickness."



It was also stated that the huge steel sphere, although not made by the Richmond Company, was "brought there to be finished after it was cast, and that it was put on the boring mill." Furthermore, "a great many valves" were made at I.P. Morris's Richmond Iron Works, "of a character to sustain heavy pressure, if of a large size; the great majority were small valves." The tool department of I.P. Morris's Richmond Iron Works made a "small engine" for him, with leather packing, "as if for water." The device was "vertical and would make 1400 turns a minute" and was connected with his Generator.

Keely needed expert help to install his machinery at the laboratory, and for this he obtained the services of Albert Chance, an employee of LP. Morris's Richmond Iron Works, who took another employee with him to work at Keely's workshop. The two also ran several tests on the Liberator, which was made of phosphor bronze. This remarkable device was "about seven feet in height and weighed at least 10,000 pounds."

Originally it had a large cylinder on top but this was replaced with a sphere. There were two globes on one side and three different chambers, and two heavy glass water gauges on the sides. The globes and the chambers were tested for strength, during which the lower chamber of phosphor bronze burst.41 While it was not properly explained, it was stated that "towards the last there was some hesitancy in accepting Keely's orders." After he died, a steel plate, marked "Keely" was still standing at the Richmond Company's premises, "about two inches in thickness, and six feet square."

Of all the engines that Keely built, photographic evidence exists of only a mere fraction. The devices on these photos have wonderful names such as the Compound Disintegrator, the Vibratory Globe Machine, the Resonator, the Rotating Globe which worked through human magnetism, a number of Vibratory Discs, the Spirophone, the Pneumatic Gun, the Provisional Engine, the Globe Motor, the Vibrating Planetary Globe, the Wave Plates, the Planetary System Engine, the Liberator, the Vibrodyne or Vibratory Accumulator, the Vibratory Switch and the Sympathetic Negative Transmitter. It is the same with written descriptions of his devices; for these we have to  rely  largely  on  eyewitness  accounts,  scattered  throughout  contemporary newspapers.

Around 1894, Keely operated his Provisional Engine, which was described in a report of an annual meeting of the Keely Motor Company as "very successful" and that apparently "developed great power." This device was "not operated by the force derived from disintegrated water," but by a Sympathetic Transmitter, a "wire from which to the engine caused the latter to be put in motion."43 While the device itself has not survived, an equally puzzling description has: The Provisional Engine was composed of "the motor proper, and the transmitter, the machine rested on a heavy brass base. Here, too, was a hollow brass sphere or ball. Between the engine and the transmitter ran a series of wires, and along the base of the transmitter an array of steel rods.  These steel rods were responsive to the touch, and compared to the ordinary musical scale, which is subject to the tuning-fork. The interior of the globe almost defied description, but out of the complex mass brass tubes and adhesive plates stood prominently. This was the shifting resonator, as Keely termed it. The tubes and plates took up the vibratory sound and carried it along with rapidity. Of these vibrations there were seven distinct kinds, said Keely, and each of these seven capable of infinitesimal division. The motor itself consisted of a heavy iron hoop, placed firmly on the plate. Within this hoop ran a drum with eight spokes. When it was once in operation, the movements of the drum were exceedingly rapid."

The Sympathetic Negative Transmitter is also lost, and only a description remains that was made during the dismantling for an observation by Professor W. Lascelles Scott of London. On the request of Bloomfield-Moore he made a "careful investigation" of Keely's inventions. "Imagine a globe in which is a vibrating disk which Keely calls a 'cladna'; also, a series of tubes which, under certain circumstances act like small organ pipes..." was Scott's puzzled description. And while he failed to get from Keely a "connected account which satisfied his English sense as to what these were," he discovered that "the apparatus appeared to be regulated upon something like a definite order or plan." He discovered that the Sympathetic Transmitter was sensitive to chords as B flat, D natural, F, D, F sharp and A. Keely considered the first three notes and their combinations as "having a tendency in one direction, which he called the polar force," and the other three notes "a tendency in an opposite direction, which he called a depolar force."

Keely's Vibrodyne, which suffered an equal fate as so many of his other devices, was apparently so strange that the Professor "would not call it a motor, an engine or source of power, but certainly it was capable of revolving." The device possessed "spokes" which in turn contained "pipes" similar to those in the Sympathetic Negative Transmitter, "with which they were in union." When the Transmitter was connected to the Vibrodyne by a single wire, nothing happened "until the right note or series of notes" were struck on the Transmitter. Then the wheel began to revolve. A galvanometer showed no evidence of electricity, and Scott stated that he knew of "no electrical or mechanical current that could be transmitted over a single wire."

Perhaps we should excuse poor Professor Scott, who did not know what to make of Keely's Vibrodyne, as Babcock, while musing over Keely's devices from his first period, stated that "Keely's inventions...are so entirely original, and so unlike any other devices that have been constructed, that there is nothing in the annals of research to afford a starting point for the understanding...Keely's instruments are no more like electrical apparatus than they are like the machinery used with steam, the product of crude molecular dissociation of water by heat."

At the time of Keely's death in 1898, a new engine was in its completion stage, which he expected to have in running order the next year. The machine had the same shape as his Globe Motor, only larger. It was made out of copper with a globe of about two feet in diameter and weighing 75 pounds. The final mechanism was three feet in diameter and built of decarbonized steel, weighing 600 pounds. After the machine was taken to Kinraide, its whereabouts became unknown.

Unfortunately, no photograph of his Vibratory Microscope exists, which, according to theosophist R. Harte, worked "by means of three wires placed across the lens of a microscope.. .its magnifying power equal to that of the great telescope in the Lick observatory—the largest in the world."48 Likewise, there are very little details of the Vibraphone, which was "fashioned after the human ear," and which collected the waves of sound and made "each wave distinct from the other in tone when the 'wave- plate' is struck after the sound has died away."

When studying the photographs of these machines, it is with a sense of awe and wonder. Keely's devices are so strange in concept, sometimes sturdy and almost barren in their industrial appearance, at other times possessing a poetic quality, a beauty that touches art and transcends that of mere functional equipment. Whatever the principles are that the machines operate on, these principles can by no means be those of conventional science. It is quite easy to see in these wonderful devices something of an artful nature. Years later, for instance, Hungarian constructionist artist Laszlo Moholy- Nagy would build his "Light-Space Modulator," a mechanized sculpture consisting of steel, plastics and wood. Moholy-Nagy's device that was meant as a work of art bears a striking resemblance in certain aspects to some of Keely's devices, and evokes the same feeling that an attempt was made to visualize unknown principles, forces and energies.

Keely's science was in certain aspects a synthesis of various opposites; the part that involved his use of the force that he variously named ether, apergy or inter-atomic force, became more and more the domain of the occult underground of that time. The other part, which consisted of his use of notes, chords, tones and sound in connection with his inventions, had a more scientific bearing. Such a synthesis might at first seem unusual but in fact it was not; the association with art and music with science started centuries before in the school of the Greek philosopher Pythagoras. The Pythagoreans devoted themselves to mathematics and believed that everything could be expressed numerically. Since they observed that the pitch of musical notes depends on a numerical ratio in the length of the chords struck, they concluded that this ratio corresponded to the distance of heavenly bodies from the center of the earth, in Keely's time poetically named the "wheelworks of nature."

Especially during the last century, scientific research on sound waves and the nature of sound rapidly progressed. This interest in sound was heralded by the work of Ernst Florenz Friedrich Chladni (1756-1827). For most of his life, Chladni was devoted to the study of sound, perhaps because he was an amateur musician,52 as was said of Keely. Chladni was an interesting character with wide-ranging interests. In 1790 he invented the Euphonium, a strange musical instrument that was made out of glass rods and steel bars which produced sound by the rubbing of a moistened fmger, or the transmission of vibrations by friction. His Euphonium, which is classified in the category of friction instruments, and the Aiuton, invented by Charles Claggett around the same time, were the first in a series of models of friction instruments. Some had piano keyboards and horizontal friction cylinders or cones that acted on upright bars, and others with bars stroked by the player's fingers or bowed by a continuous bow.

Chladni also discovered the longitudinal waves and the so-called Chladni figures. Since nobody had studied the vibrations of plates, Chladni developed a technique in 1802 of supporting a plate of glass or brass at one central point, covering the surface with fine sand, and then stroking the edge with a violin bow. The sand then collected along the nodal lines of zero movement and thus formed "striking geometric patterns." He visited the Academie des Sciences in Paris in 1808 to demonstrate this technique and its results, and subsequently the visible display of vibrations in solids, and even in gases, was used in teaching.54 One of his other interests was meteorites, which he collected. He was one of the first to theorize that they fell from the heavens. In 1794, he acknowledged the theory that meteorites were debris from space, a theory which he would expand upon in his in 1819 book Uber Feuer Meteore u. uber die mit denselben herabgefallenen Massen.

Herman von Helmholtz (1821-1894), who formulated the resonance theory of hearing, devised an instrument that could test the presence or absence of a particular harmonic in a given musical tone. This was called the Helmholtz resonator or resonance globe, and was a hollow globe made out of thin brass, with an opening at each end across the diameter. The Helmholtz resonators enabled sounds to be analyzed into their constituent frequencies, with benefit to music and speech theory. Helmholtz also synthesized sounds, reproducing these by "combining the individual sounds composing it, as shown by his resonators. "

Like Chladni, Helmholtz was deeply interested in meteors, and in 1871 he wrote that meteors and comets might disseminate "germs of life wherever a new world has reached the stage in which it is a suitable dwelling place for organic beings."

Karl Rudolph Koenig (1832-1901), a brilliant student of Helmholtz, moved to Paris in 1851 and took the unusual step for an academic of apprenticing himself to a violin-maker by the name of Vuillaume. Koenig made an unrivaled reputation for novelty and accuracy, and much fundamental work was done in laboratories in Europe and America, employing his equipment.58 During the 1876 Philadelphia Centennial Exposition, when Keely had an operational Globe Motor, Karl Rudolph Koenig was awarded a gold medal for his work in acoustics. Koenig's greatest contribution to precision in the study of sound was the clock tuning fork, which "acted the role of a pendulum, and it could then be used as the standard for comparison with other forks."

Some years earlier, in 1862, on the International Exposition in London, Koenig displayed his newly invented manometric flame apparatus, "a bank of eight Helmholtz resonators, with their small ends each connected to a separate manometric capsule which acts on a gas jet. When the rectangle of mirrors is rotated, it is easy to see the flame that is vibrating, so that a sound can be analyzed."

To Understand the Art: Keely's Discoveries	171

There are several similarities between the research of those early scientists and some of Keely's experiments; it is also interesting to note similarities between the Helmholtz resonators with their tuning forks, and parts of Keely's devices. Keely was also keenly aware of the works of these scientists, and at least one of them was aware of his work.

Koenig had been present during one of Keely's experiments. In a letter written around 1891, he critically "ventured a suggestion as a test of the nature of the force that Mr. Keely is dealing with." This involved Keely's claim that a needle of his compass revolved as a result of negative polar attraction. Koenig remarked that since Keely had written that gold, silver and platina were "excellent media for the transmission of these triple currents," but since everybody knew that these metals were "unaffected by magnetic influences," he should make a compass needle of one of these three metals. To this request Keely replied that this was impossible, but he nevertheless took up the experiment and reportedly succeeded in making a needle of the three metals and let it rotate by "differential molecular action; induced by negative attractive outreach, which is as free of magnetic force as a cork."61 According to Bloomfield-Moore, Koenig stated: "I not only think Mr. Keely's theories possible, but I consider them quite probable."

Keely undoubtedly visited the great Philadelphia Centennial Exposition as so many other Philadelphians did, and may have seen Koenig's work there. His favorite author was Chladni, whose writings he read in his youth and whose philosophy made a "deep impression on Keely." He even named a certain part of his Sympathetic Negative Transmitter a cladna: "imagine a globe in which is a vibrating disk, which Keely calls a "cladna." Chladni plates were also used by Keely, one of these being a large steel plate of 20 inches in diameter, which he struck with a "tiny hammer."65 He was also quoted as saying: "I am now having a compound siphon made by Helmholtz, near Paris. I like his work."

There also was an esoteric strain in Keely's philosophies. For this we have only to look at his terminology. It has been established that most of his terminology was unique, meaning that it had no precedent in either scientific jargon or occult parlance or concepts. Every new invention or discovery brought with it a new nomenclature and vocabulary. But his terminology for the force that he claimed to have discovered is a different case.

In 1875, he called the medium that delivered his force "vapor"67 or "vaporic substance," although it is suggested by Bloomfield-Moore that around that time this substance was also named "Keil." From this the term "vaporic force" evolved. In the following years, we also find terms in his philosophy such as "inter-atomic force," or "dynaspheric force."

Around 1881, Babcock even suggested that Keely's force should be called "Keal," meaning "Keely vapor."

Around 1887, Keely's force was being compared with Bulwer-Lytton's vril, and we once again encounter new phrasings. Now he called the force "vibratory force," "sympathetic etheric force" and "sympathetic vibratory force." At that time, Keely mingled cabalistic and theosophical concepts while speaking of his force, that to him could be "best described as coming nearer to the primal force or will-power of Nature...it is that primal force itself...the breath of life which God breathed into man's nostrils at the creation of the world—the motion of the spirit on the face of the waters; the wave motion of the brain."

Two years after this beautiful imagery it was alleged that he claimed to use an "ethereal force" and the same year elsewhere it was stated that "Keely's force is vibratory sympathy." In 1890 he called his force "vibratory force," a term that was still in use in 1895, while in the same year the term "apergy" became grafted on Keely's force. In 1896, it was announced that his newest motor was "supposed to be energized by pure vibration, instead of "etheric vapor."

This changing phraseology demonstrates Keely's personal intellectual evolution in thought and a maturing process of ideas. But his use of the term "ether" stemmed directly from occult tradition. There, before and after the idea became a topic for research in conventional 19th century science, the concept of unknown and invisible forces or energies that surround us daily were firmly rooted. Significantly Tesla kept using the term ether after its abandonment by the scientific world.

This notion of an all-pervading energy, a universal life force, has a long tradition and different names in various cultures: The Chinese called it Qi, the Vital Energy which played an important part in Sheng Fui. To the Japanese it was Ki. The Hindus called it Prana and the Polynesians and the Hawaiians, Mana. Hypocrites called it Vis Medicatrix Naturae, Galen called it Pneuma. In the writings of Hermes Trismegistos the force is Telesma.

Sixteenth century alchemists like Paracelsus and Van Helmont called it Munis and Magnale Magnum, respectively. To Franz Anton Mesmer the force was Animal Magnetism. Von Reichenbach called it Odic or Odylic Force, and the radiesthesists, Etheric Force. To Eliphas Levi and to Blavatsky, who saw all these connections, it was the Astral Light.

In the twentieth century L.E. Ehman called it X-Force, Wilhelm Reich called it Orgone and the Nazi dowsers knew it as W-Force. To modern-day ley hunters it is Ley-energy or more poetically The Dragon Pulse, reminiscent of Levi's Great Serpent. Soviet parapsychologists called it Bioplasmic Energy or Psychotronic Energy.

"What is the primordial chaos but Ether? The modern Ether; not such as is recognized by our scientists, but such as it was known to the ancient philosophers... Ether, with all its mysterious and occult properties, containing in itself the germs of universal creation...," Blavatsky wrote.

In a climate of new scientific discoveries and the rise of esoterism, ether became a widely researched concept. For instance, spiritualist Sir Oliver Lodge lectured on the ether and its functions in 1882 for the London Institution. He described ether as "an undivided substance that fills all space, that can vibrate as light, that can be divided in positive and negative electricity that, in vortex movement, creates matter and that through composition and not pressure, transmits all actions and reactions, that the substance may yield. This is the modern view on ether and its functions."

But centuries before, the early alchemists gave the name ether to the Quintessence which to them was the fifth element, a power or essence that bound in a unity the otherwise separate four elements. Quintessence was synonymous with elixir, mercury of the Philosophers and etheric. The Quintessence was said to be semi-material and visible to certain persons. The four elements, the fifth named Quintessence and two other unnamed elements formed the Seven Cosmical Elements. These were held as conditional modifications and aspects of one element, the source of Akasha itself.

Akasha or Akasa was used in occultism and theosophy as an equivalent of the ancient term "aether," according to Hinduism the fifth and most subtle element. The word is the Sanskrit term for "all pervasive space." Akasha is also called Soniferous Ether. Theosophical doctrine links it to Quintessence. According to Blavatsky, the Akasha forms the anima mundi, the soul of the world. Through it, divine thought was allowed to manifest in matter. The anima mundi constitutes the soul and spirit of mankind. It produces mesmeric, magnetic operations of nature. Blavatsky introduced the concept of Akasha in the early twentieth century and connected it to the other notions of the universal life force, such as the Sidereal Light of the Rosicrucians, Levi's Astral Light and the Odic Force of Von Reichenbach. Astral Light is held by the occultists as a manifestation of the Aether, which is not to be confused with the ether of the modern physicists. Aether however can be linked to the Etheric of the occultists. Etheric was to them the force or energy that gives life within our cosmos. The influence of the etheric forces on inert matter creates the diversities of natural phenomena.

The Akashic Records were the supreme records of everything that has ever occurred since the very beginning of the universe. Theosophy claims that these records exist as impressions in the astral plane. Edgar Cayce asserted that he often consulted these records, as did Mary Baker Eddy and Rudolph Steiner, who called the records the Akashic Chronicle. With it he produced his detailed descriptions of the mythical lost civilizations Atlantis and Lemuria, as theosophists Scott-Eliott and Leadbetter did before him.

While the term ether crops up in Keely's phraseology around the time that it was widely researched to do so, Bloomfield-Moore admitted that it was from a particular book that both she and Keely discovered that "it was the ether that he had imprisoned, and for years after he confined his attention to efforts to keep the ether in an engine, supposing the ether itself to be the energy induced." This book was A Sketch of a Philosophy, published in 1868, and written by Angus MacVicar. Rev. John Andrew, who was a friend of the late MacVicar, brought the book to Bloomfield-Moore's attention. According to her, Andrew "maintained great interest in Keely's researches since he first heard of them."83 Bloomfield-Moore introduced MacVicar's concepts to Keely in 1884. A compilation of MacVicar's A Sketch of a Philosophy entitled Ether the True Protoplasm was sent to Keely, after which his attention turned to researches of the ether.

Shortly after, the book Harmonics of Tones and Colours Developed by Evolution, written by Charles Darwin's niece F.J. Hughes, was sent to Keely. This led him into the line of experiment that would enable him to show on a disc the various colors of sound, each note having its color, and to demonstrate in various ways Mrs. Hughes' own words "that the same laws which develop musical harmonies develop the universe."85 Possibly this line of experiment was the origin of what would be known as Keely's remarkable musical charts.

Keely was not a seeker of perpetual motion, as was sometimes alleged. The search for a device that without the external supply of energy would deliver everlasting labor has always been a dream of mankind, although it is considered impossible to attain. Interestingly, the idea for such a device originated in ancient India. Rotations, cycles, rotational images and cyclical processes play an essential part in Indian philosophy. A central doctrine of all Indian religions is the concept of Karma; the continuation of good and evil deeds of man that defines his fate in this life and in the cycle of future rebirths. This Karmic process is without beginning and end. The perpetuum mobile originated as the symbol for this everlasting cycle. Thus the Hindu astronomer and mathematician Bhascara described at least two of the earliest perpetuum mobile designs around 1150, one consisting of hollow stakes filled with mercury.

This idea of a perpetuum mobile was adopted by the Arabian scientists and philosophers of the 13th century, and in their writings of that time we again find numerous references to perpetuum mobiles with mercury-filled tubes. But where in ancient India the perpetuum mobile was considered more as a religious symbol, the Arabs saw in it a device that could be used for more practical ends, such as in waterlifts. The Arabian sciences would eventually influence Europe, and with it came the concept of the perpetuum mobile. Thus a disk-shaped perpetuum mobile appeared for the first time in 1235 with the French architect Villard de Honnecourt. In medieval Europe of the 13th century, with the increase of knowledge of magnetism and the magnetic needle, Guillaume d'Auvergne, bishop of Paris, proposed the idea that an analogy exists between magnetic induction and the transfer of movement capabilities of an outer heavenly body on a inner heavenly body.

In 1269, Pierre de Maricourt, also known as Petrus Peregrinus, wrote in a letter called "Epistula de Magnete" that solely treats magnets and their capabilities about experimental researches on the magnetic force, that he saw as Virtus Dei or the glory of God. De Maricourt saw the heavenly poles, not the poles of the earth, as the abode of the magnetic forces, that propel the magnetic needle. He proposed the idea that a globular-shaped magnetic stone would move with the rotation of the heavens. The axle should point towards the pole of the heavens. De Maricourt related in great detail of a magnetic perpetuum mobile with a magnetic needle fastened in its center.

Later we find innumerable inventors, scientists, and even priests involved in me search for such an apparatus. One of these, the 17th century Jesuit priest Christoph Scheiner developed a magnificent idea. In 1616 he designed a device that would operate according to his idea on gravity. Scheiner thought that the center of the universe would also be the center of gravity. From this, he projected an axle to a given point, from which another axle in an angle of 90 degrees sprang. On the end of this axle he would fasten a weight. Since the weight would constantly try to move towards the center of gravity, an everlasting circular motion could be obtained. A sketch of his device which he named "Gnomon in centro Mundi" appeared in 1616 in his book, Mechanica Hydraulico-pneumatica, a title that by the way, bears a similarity with Keely's hydro pneumatic pulsating vacuo machine. Although Scheiner's idea would be discarded by later fellow-Jesuits, he was no deluded seeker; he built the first Keplerian telescope, and can be credited as the co-discoverer of the solar spots. He invented the pantograph and he researched the working of the human eye.

Another Jesuit priest, Athanasius Kircher, proposed a perpetuum mobile in his book Magnes sive de arte magnetica that appeared in 1640-1641, that consisted of a wheel-shaped apparatus, built of a disk with iron rods that would turn itself around while under the magnetic influence of the static magnetic field of four magnets.

Between 1812 and 1814, several centuries and innumerable perpetuum mobile designs later, Italian physicist Guiseppe Zamboni invented and designed a device which he called "Elettromotore perpetuo," consisting of two electrically charged pillars made of amongst others of 2,000 glass disks with two globes on their tops. Between these pillars, with opposing poles a pendulum was placed which then would swing between the two pillars.

In 1887, Keely obtained continuity of motion in his engine, but he never claimed to have invented nor sought the construction of a perpetual motion machine. This misunderstanding arose from other statements by him; one of these was that he claimed that he could "put in motion a power that can run a train without fuel of any kind or any other force for thousands of years continuously if desired." Keely also expected that when the motion had been once set up in any of his machines, it would continue until the material was worn out. It was this claim which caused him to be classed with perpetual-motion seekers,93 and which was perhaps the reason that Peretti visited him. Peretti, the Vineland inventor, mason and machinist who claimed to have Keely's secret, confided to a reporter that he had tried to invent a perpetual motion machine "since his transaction with Keely...but it was a plan of his own, not Keely's."

On this subject, Keely made several statements: "The nearest approach to a certainty is made through harmony with nature's laws. The surest media are those which nature has laid out in her wonderful workings. The man who deviates from these paths will suffer the penalty of a defeat, as is seen in the record of "perpetual motion" seekers. I have been classed with such dreamers; but I find consolation in the thought that it is only by those who are utterly ignorant of the great and marvelous truths which I have devoted my life to demonstrate and to bring within reach of all.  Perpetual motion is against nature, and it is only by following nature's laws that I can ever hope to reach the goal I am aiming to reach." And in the concept of his vibratory engine, he "did not seek to attain perpetual motion."

When studying Keely's research and trying to get a clear picture of his
achievements, we are faced with a number of difficulties. The first problem, of course, is the almost total absence of his many devices and writings. Then there is his jargon, the language in which he described his discoveries. Although he had no formal school training after his 12th year, he somehow acquired an unusual command of the English language. This problem was already noted time and again in his day, and from someone who listened to him, we may obtain an impression of what that meant: "Mr. Keely talks with the rapid fluency begotten in thirty years study... while his thoughts are often clothed in words rarely joined together in framing a sentence...Now let the reader imagine the...statement poured into him at the rate of 250 words per minute, with no stop for refreshments, and he will experience solid relief to be assured by Mr. Keely that he is preparing for publication a complete explanation.  It is simply impossible to reproduce more than a fraction of what is freely put at one's disposal in a chat of an hour with this remarkable man."99 And a journalist, after having had the ordeal of listening to Keely's verbose explanations, shruggingly remarked that he "didn't understand it, but nobody ever understood differential calculus or even the Abracadabra in a day or two days."100 And another person simply said that "The inscription on the Zuni tablets would have been quite as plain."

Keely assured that he would explain all in a book or two, but these never saw print and we are left with only those parts of his theories that were published by Bloomfield-Moore and Colville, or are scattered in the various newspapers of the day. Bloomfield-Moore writes that, "Every branch of science, every doctrine of extensive application, has had its alphabet, its rudiment, its grammar...,"102 but her book is mainly written as an apology. Though it presents enough theoretical matter, it sadly lacks a complete comprehensible glossary of Keely's terms or grammar. The problem with his grammar is that he used common words in an uncommon way, while he had a liking for uncommon words, which he used plentifully. A reason for this may have been that he was inventing a new terminology for his novel ideas, without taking the trouble to see if the terms were applicable or whether they had not already been used by others. In addition he had the ability of not only using uncommon words, but also of using many more words to express an idea than was in fact necessary. To make matters worse, every new discovery or invention that he made brought with it a new nomenclature and a new vocabulary.104 In all fairness to him it must be noted that he was not always misunderstood by his contemporaries. The accounts of those who understood his explanations differ from the accounts of those who didn't.

Faced with all this, the remaining difficulty is in understanding those parts of Keely's theories that were printed. When reading a sentence or a text, it may read grammatically correct, but the meanings are obscure and hermetic. Owing to the unique nature of his philosophies, we find his writings riddled with terms such as Sympathetic Vibration, Etheric Force, Dynaspheric Force, transympathetic, divine force differentiation, triune streams or Aqueous Disintegration.

Dale Pond, who has studied Keely's inventions for more than a decade, remarked that "While it is true that Keely used a lot of big and unusual words, he always used them in a masterful way....If one takes the trouble of looking these words up and studying them he will find they are used in ways outside of our normal awareness."

Keely was asked to prepare a glossary of terms so that he might be better understood. Since such a glossary was never printed, it was erroneously held that he refused to do so,106 which is not true since he—at least in theory—was planning on publishing his philosophy. At one time it was alleged that a Dr. Brinton, "acquainted with more strange languages, dead and living, than anybody else," made a "translation of Keely's philosophy into English, which is described as able, lucid and logical."107 It is also asserted that such a glossary was published in the 1894 book Dashed Against the Rock, by Keely's friend, William Colville. A short comprehensive glossary was recently published in the book Universal Laws Never Before Revealed: Keely's Secrets,109 in which the reader may find a wealth of materials pertaining to a modem interpretation of the technical aspects of Keely's discoveries.

Keely's experiments spanned more than a quarter of a century and were wide- ranged and kaleidoscopic in their variety. What has been left to us—compared to what has been lost after almost a century—is but a fragmentary view of what Keely was actually aiming at and what he accomplished. He changed his methods many times, abandoning previously-held important lines of research, scrapping pieces of machinery, and renaming devices. It is even alleged that he sometimes destroyed his devices after a few runs, devices that were seen only by himself and his assistants. At one time, during a spontaneous search by frustrated members of the Keely Motor Company in 1883, 12 discarded engines were discovered "wrecked" and "used in past experiments," carelessly thrown in a corner, upstairs in Keely's workshop.

Each moment in Keely's long period of invention seemed to yield many more directions, and sometimes he would discover quite important applications by sheer accident. The view emerges that he was entangled in a sheer labyrinth of research, each important finding opening even more roads to take.

Indications for this labyrinthine maze, of which even his close allies like Collier knew little or nothing, are a slight remark that he was somehow able to weld metal without heat,112 or of his "sensitizing process." About its origins we learn only that this new aspect in the complex history of his inventions began somewhere around 1894, and that Lancaster Thomas was present during the "sensitizing of several disks" and had assisted in its performance. Both Collier and Thomas stated that this sensitizing process was "absolutely new," although Collier assumed that this mysterious process could be patented.

There are also casual mentions of a strange substance. Although this substance was pivotal in the working of Keely's force, we learn no more of it after the following slight references: "The only thing that caused any doubt seemed to be the exact composition of a peculiar metallic paste or amalgam without which the 'sympathetic attractive force' could not be produced." And although the ever- boisterous Collier stated that he believed that his ally Thomas could produce this material, we hear no more of any attempt, or an explanation of what this substance was actually used for in Keely's inventions.

The second reference is equally puzzling: "One of the secrets of the machine is the composition of the 'vitalized metal disks' and 'sensitized cartridges of metallic powder."115 Elsewhere we learn more, although still not enough about this mysterious substance: "Aside from these disks, Mr. Keely has prepared a metallic powder, which, to look at, very much resembles iron or steel filings, but which lacks one essential feature of iron or steel—it will not respond to the attraction of a magnet. "116 No further explanation was offered upon the nature or composition of the cartridges of metallic powder, which were possibly the same as the peculiar metallic paste, or the unspecified "amalgam paste." In 1895, a puzzled reporter wrote that Keely said it took him three years of study before he could produce the substance.

Two years later, G. W. Browne, "who has studied the subject" and concluded that it had to be "electricity" that propelled Keely's engines, tried his best shot at explaining what the strange metallic powder was. He wrote that parts of the Liberator consisted of "nine cylindrical boxes surmounted by vitalized discs of metal. In the center of these cylindrical boxes are placed small cylinders termed 'sensitized cartridges' loaded with a metallic powder only known to Keely, and which, he claims, furnished all the vitality which the discs possess." The reporter concluded that these sensitized cartridges must have been "in reality small batteries...They are almost filled with water when Keely puts into each a teaspoonful of a metallic powder, the composition which he claims as his secret, but which is known to the world as bisulfate of mercury (truly a metallic powder)."

We've now established two major periods. The first period, prior to 1881, involved the creation of the force through the disintegration of water. The second involved the creation of the force out of almost anything. Keely also followed two major directions with his experiments. One was the constant search for a method of mastering his force and making it drive his various engines. After having mastered the force he said, it would be "adapted to engines of all sizes and capacities, as well to an engine capable of propelling the largest ship as to one that will operate a sewing machine. Equally well and certain is it that it will be adapted as a projectile force for guns and cannons of all sizes, from the ordinary shoulder-piece to the heaviest artillery."

Over this direction, the shadow of the ever-vigilant Keely Motor Company looms heavily; and in this direction he constructed his more than 129 engines in search for the "perfect engine." The other direction, however, was to establish the laws of etheric force, which would lead to the earlier-mentioned glossary called "The 40 Laws of Harmony." Over this direction shone the light of his supporter, Bloomfield-Moore.

He also claimed to have three systems, and he described them as follows: "My first system is the one which requires introductory mediums of differential gravities, air and water, to induce disturbances of equilibrium on the liberation of vapor, which only reached the inter-atomic position and was held there by the submersion of the molecular and atomic leads in the Generator I then used. It was impossible with these mediums to go beyond the atomic with this instrument; and I could not dispense with the water until my Liberator was invented, nor reach the maximum of the full line of vibration. My first system embraces liberator, engine and gun."

His second system he considered complete, "as far as the liberation of the ether is concerned, but not sufficiently complete as yet, in its devices for indicating and governing the vibratory etheric circuit, to make it a safe medium." His third system included aerial and submarine navigation. Apart from a method of disintegration that he claimed to have discovered by accident while working on this third system, Keely also claimed to have discovered another application in which he was an unknowing forerunner of the radiesthesists, but was preceded by Franz Anton Mesmer—the healing of disease through the restoration of the inner balance. "One of Mr. Keely's discoveries shapes his theory that all nervous and brain disorders may be cured by equating the differentiation that exists in the disordered structure," Bloomfield-Moore writes, "When his system is completed, medical men will have a new domain opened to them for experiment" (her italics).

Keely saw disease as "a disturbance of the equilibrium between positive and negative forces," and writing about mental illness, stated that, "In considering the mental forces as associated with the physical, I find, by my past researches, that the convolutions which exist in the cerebral field are entirely governed by the sympathetic conditions that surround them." In Keely's hard-to-understand thesis on this subject, owing to his hermetic prose, he nevertheless expounds on such original ideas as the differentiation of the molecular conditions of a mass of metal of any shape "so as to produce what you may express as a crazy piece of iron or a crazy piece of steel, or, vice versa (his italics), and intelligent condition of the same," or the cause of insanity and sensory hallucinations, "such as flashes of light and color, or confused sounds and disagreeable odors, etc., etc." These, according to Keely, are the result of "a condition of differentiation in the mass chords of the cerebral convolutions, which creates an antagonistic molecular bombardment towards the neutral or attractive centers of such convolutions; which, in turn, produce a morbid irritation in the cortical sensory centers in the substance of ideation."

While the foregoing is again a typical example of original concepts packed in his difficult-to-understand prose, his ideas on the brain have a poetic quality. Since the normal brain is to Keely "like a harp of many strings strung to perfect harmony," cure is a matter of adjustment: "If we live in a sympathetic field we become sympathetic, and a tendency from the abnormal to the normal presents itself by an evolution of a purely sympathetic flow towards its attractive centers."

And while Bloomfield-Moore readily admitted like so many Keely researchers after her that "there are few who will fathom the full meaning of these views," his discoveries according to her "embrace the manner or way of obtaining the keynote, or 'chord of mass,' of mineral, vegetable, and animal substances," and she envisioned a universal appliance of Keely's inventions: "the construction of instruments, or machines, by which this law can be utilized in mechanics, in arts, and in restoration of equilibrium in disease."

We are also left with several statements that, in line with this holistic view, he involved himself in researches that tried to link his devices to the waves of human brain, or to other bodily processes. We have the slight reference that his Rotating Globe "worked through human magnetism," and it is asserted that around 1882 he discovered something that was termed "the source of life and the connecting link between intelligent will and matter."

This he explained three years later, "My researches teach me that electricity is but a certain condensed form of atomic vibration, a form showing only the introductory features which precede the etheric vibratory condition. It is a modulated force so conditioned, in its more modest flows, as to be susceptible of benefit to all organisms. Though destructive to a great degree in its explosive positions, it is the medium by which the whole system of organic nature is permeated beneficially; transfusing certain forms of inert matter with life-giving principles. It is to a certain degree an effluence of divinity; but only as the branch is to the tree. We have to go far beyond this condition to reach the pure etheric one, or the body of the tree. The Vibratory Etheric tree has many branches, and electricity is but one of them. Though it is a medium by which the operations of vital forces are performed, it cannot in my opinion be considered the soul of matter."

Interestingly, there are reasons to suspect that certain parts of the concepts that were developed by those early searchers of perpetual motion were incorporated in Keely's highly intriguing researches on this aspect of his discoveries.

Bloomfield-Moore for instance, while digressing on contemporary researches into the nature of magnetism and how it could possibly affect the human nervous system, writes how Keely's experiments "show that the two (magnetism and electricity) are, in part, antagonistic, and that both are but modifications of the one force in nature ..
.Should it be that Mr. Keely's compound secret includes any explanation of this operation of will-force, showing that it may be cultivated, in common with the other powers which God has given us, we shall then recover some of the knowledge lost out of the world, or retained only in gypsy tribes and among Indian adepts."

Elsewhere she assures her readers that while scientists "look upon the human organism as little more than a machine, taking small interest in researches which evince the dominion of mind over matter," it was Keely's research that had "shown him that it is neither the electric nor the magnetic flow, but the etheric, which sends its current along our nerves."

According to her, the ultimate consequence of Keely's research results was that a "true coincidence" existed between "any mediums—cartilage to steel, steel to wood, wood to stone, and stone to cartilage—that the same influence (sympathetic association) which governs all the solids holds the same governing influence over all liquids; and again, from liquid to solid, embracing the three kingdoms—animal, vegetable and mineral—that the action of mind over matter thoroughly substantiates these incontrovertible laws of sympathetic etheric influence; and that the only true medium which exists in nature is the sympathetic flow emanating from the normal human brain, governing correctly the graduating and setting up of the true sympathetic vibratory positions in machinery necessary to success."

Since we sadly lack coherent notes or any further documentation of any research results that Keely might have obtained, we now have only the assertions that along those lines he indeed constructed at least one of his devices according to that most innovating concept: "In the image of God made He man, and in the image of man Keely has constructed his Liberator. Not literally, but, as his vibraphone (for collecting the waves of sound and making each wave distinct from the other in tone when the wave-plate is struck after the sound has died away) is constructed after the human ear, so his Liberator corresponds in its parts to the human head," and in his Disintegrator, "the neutral center represents the human heart," Bloomfield-Moore explains.

However, since no documentation other than her writing and Keely's statements have survived, we can only speculate whether this line of research went beyond its planning stages. Did Keely build other devices according to those principles? A machine that one could merely think or wish into action? A technology that would be so avant-garde in nature that, like some of the more radical ideas in the fields of modern cybernetics, the differences between man and machine would gradually melt away into an indistinguishable whole? It is doubtful that the tools existed during his time to accomplish such a feat, and we are left to speculate on this particular point by absence of any other materials or documentation.

Keely developed the intriguing notion that his devices could be linked to the human brain, or to human magnetism by envisioning one force that permeated all things. Coincidentally the same year, his discoveries were compared to Bulwer-Lytton's vril- force, so aptly described in The Coming Race. Around that time Keely stated that his force resembled the "will-force of nature" and "the waves of the brain."

Details of this notion would eventually be transformed by others to the theory that Keely himself operated his devices through peculiar paranormal powers. The roots of this paranormal power theory emerged from theosophical quarters; there the aspects that we are surrounded by one force or power tallied more with Keely's ideas. From its beginning, theosophy had been looking for a reconciliation of modern Western science and ancient Eastern philosophy. To do so, theosophy borrowed deeply from the vast storehouse of age old Indian doctrine; with amongst others the idea of a perpetuum mobile symbolizing the everlasting cycles of rebirth. Meanwhile in the West, there was the astrological concept of the body parts of man that tallied with certain zodiacal signs and the influences of the planets, ultimately meaning that the blueprint of the cosmos was to be found in man himself. There were the endless Akasha-chronicles, and the sea of ether. There were also other Western concepts that preceded theosophy, such as those of the Odylic force, of Mesmerism, of Bulwer-Lytton's vril and the ether and of the fluidum and ectoplasm of the spiritists.

All this more or less evolved into the notion that man was a brilliant interface or controlling mechanism between this material aspect of existence and the invisible cosmic life force, the sea of light and of willpower, and the emanations of the one supreme being. It was a small step for an esoterist or a theosophist at the dawn of the 19th century industrial age with its bristling steam mills and in which science made a new discovery each day, to envision the mind as the link between the cosmic sea of life force and avant-garde technology, for the modification of man's surroundings and in the end perhaps the whole universe. One was either born with this capacity, or else one needed the development of one's willpower through initiation. And technology was not merely something that one would develop along rationalist, empirical lines; it was an aspect of man's inner evolution.

With this in mind, we must treat the following statements from Blavatsky, who considered Keely as one who obtained his results form the fifth and sixth planes of the etheric or astral force, the fifth and sixth principles of Akasha, accordingly.

She considered Keely to be gifted from birth. In her eyes, he was one of those mortals whose "inner selves are primordially connected, by reason of their direct descent, with that group.. .who are called 'the first born of Ether. '"130 Thus she reasoned that "...whenever such individuals as the discoverer of Etheric Force—John Worrell Keely—men with peculiar psychic and mental capacities are born,"131 claiming that "It has been stated that the inventor of the 'Self-Motor' was what is called, in the jargon of the Kabbalists, a 'natural-born magician... "  it would follow that Keely's constant struggle to develop his system for commercial use was "beyond his power," for he could not "pass to others that which was a capacity inherent in his special nature. "

Blavatsky asserted that "the discoveries made by him will prove wonderful—yet only in his hands and through himself.  The truth of this assertion has, perhaps, not quite dawned upon the discoverer himself.134  no one, who should have repeated the thing done by himself, could have produced the same results  For Keely's difficulty has hitherto been to produce a machine which would develop and regulate the 'force' without the intervention of 'willpower' or personal influence, whether conscious or unconscious to the operator. In this he has failed, so far as others were concerned, for no one but himself (her italics) could operate on his 'machines.'" That Keely's organism is directly connected with the production of the marvelous results is proven by the following statement emanating from one who knows the great discoverer intimately. At one time the shareholders of the Keely Motor Company put a man in his workshop for the express purpose of discovering his secret. After six months of close watching, he said to J.W. Keely one day: "I know how it is done now." They were setting up a machine together, and Keely was manipulating the stop-cock which turned the force on and off. "Try it, then," was the answer. The man turned the cock, and nothing came. "Let me see you do it again," the man said to Keely. Keely complied, and the machinery operated at once. Again the other tried, but without success. Then Keely put his hand on his shoulder and told him to try once more. He did so, with the result of an instantaneous production of the current.

The same year that Keely envisioned the holistic application of his discoveries, a woman told him that in her opinion he had "opened the door to the spirit-world," on which Keely politely answered: "Do you think so? I have sometimes thought I might be able to discover the origin of life."

But Keely himself maintained a certain degree of ambiguity surrounding this aspect of his discoveries; for according to Bloomfield-Moore, he at first gave "no attention whatsoever to the occult bearing of his discovery. It was only after he had pursued his research, under the advantages which his small Liberator afforded him for such experiments, that he realized the truth of this woman's assertion. It was then, in 1887, that 'a bridge of mist' formed itself before him, connecting the laws which govern physical science with the laws which govern spiritual science..." and a year later Keely allegedly told that he had made "such startling progress that he now admits...that if not in actual experiment, at least in theory he has passed into the world of spirit."

Bloomfield-Moore's endorsement of Keely's views were in accordance with theosophy: "Paracelsus taught that man is nourished and sustained by magnetic power, which he called the universal motor of nature," she writes, and referring to Keely's ideas on his discoveries for the appliance of the treatment of illness, she refers to light therapy by Seth Pancoast, one of the founding members of the Theosophical Society. We again may glimpse a possible influence on Keely's Christian symbology, for while describing his discoveries Bloomfield-Moore states in reference to Pancoast that she has learned that "students, versed in Biblical lore, declare that the esoteric teachings of the Book of Job enunciate a system of light-cure."137 But on the notion that Keely himself possessed paranormal capabilities, he thought quite otherwise. He once lamented, "I have been told that I am a powerful medium. But if there is in me any secret force such as resides in no other man...that force is in no way akin to spiritualism."

Keely was never able to remove the suspicions of mediumship surrounding him and his inventions, nor was he able to refute the claims that he possessed a paranormally-gifted mind. Not only an unusual number of theosophists, mediums and those who were interested in spiritualism clustered around his person, in 1896 a reporter noted that Keely "made a very significant remark": "I am always a good deal disturbed when I begin one of these exhibitions," Keely allegedly said, "for sometimes, if an unsympathetic person is present, the machines will not work."

The reporter was quick to point out that "How many times have 'spiritualist' mediums said the same thing! How many times have they accounted for failure by explaining that the spirits were repelled by some unsympathetic person in the audience or 'circle'! ...It is reported, that the motive power he has discovered is 'the will of God,' and that the old man can move railroad trains and other things by word of mouth without the aid of any machinery whatsoever. Keely now admits that he is working on a new basis or hypothesis. Do not his latest allusions to the adverse influence of unsympathetic or unbelieving persons foreshadow a coming explanation that his occult force is really supplied from the spirit world?"

And thus, in spite of Keely's denial, the press, but also Blavatsky, H.S. Olcott, her ally and co-founder of the Theosophical Society, anthroposophist Rudolf Steiner, Fort and others developed the theory that Keely might indeed possess paranormal capabilities. Blavatsky and Olcott named this "psychical abilities."

No wonder then, that as late as 1913, Dutch astrologer and theosophist A.E. Thierens wrote of Keely that: "man may have, through one's willpower, at his disposal endless forces in this physical world, of this J.W. Keely with his motor has given an at this time still not totally controllable but nevertheless highly curious example. There
is...reason to believe that Keely found the key to that cosmic life force."

Not always would these theosophical views excerpt their evocative power; all of the above led a researcher to grudgingly remark that "The greatest tragedy of the time was that Keely's ideas occurred at the time when theosophy was being evolved, and the ideas of the Hindu sages upon such varies matters as physics and chemistry tended to become grafted on those of such workers as Keely. It would be more correct to say that it was not so much the ideas which were erroneous as the interpretations, most of which time has shown to have been wrong."

Steiner referred to Keely's endeavors as the result of "the new mechanical faculty," although his concept deviated from the theory that Keely was somehow a paranormally-gifted person. His idea was more in line with Keely's original concept; he developed a notion of a technology in which future machines might be driven by waves of the brain.

Fort however, with his witty flair, called Keely's supposed paranormal abilities a "wild talent."