# 19世纪的大飞艇浪潮 


12 The Great 19th Century Airship Wave

"I saw...gliding quickly through the air, what appeared a small boat, impelled by sails shaped like wings."

Bulwer-Lytton, The Coming Race, 1871

"You can take my word for it, that the airship is no myth."

Rabbi A. Levy, New Orleans Picayune, April 24, 1897

".. .should we, the aeronauts, forever stay the stepchildren of this Mother Earth?"
Fritz Holten, Das Aeromobil, 1912


Two years after Colville's remarkable description of what an airship might look like built according to Keely's antigravity ideas, and two years after Astor published his book in which he treated precisely such a space voyage, something inexplicable happened in the skies over large parts of America. From November 1896 until April 1897, thousands of people saw UFOs, described as brilliant lights and vague aeroforms, which were nicknamed "airships" in the press. During what has been termed "the great 19th century airship wave," all the characteristics of later UFO waves were apparent. There were contacts; eyewitnesses would often meet the alleged builders of these airships, terrestrial and extraterrestrial, with some who claimed to represent the inventors. There would even be an occasional abduction, and tales of crashes and hoaxes.

Thanks to the diligence of several ufologists, the 19th century airship wave is well documented, and we now have hundreds of pages at our disposal, rescued from slowly deteriorating microfilm.1 Notwithstanding all the reports and all that has been written about it, the wave has never been explained and has remained a ufological enigma. It is not the intention to document this wave, as others have done so.

It is however, significant that the airship wave occurred at a time when Keely was involved in his antigravity research and had actually built several devices for his proposed system of aerial navigation. But before we jump to conclusions, it must be taken into account that from the documentation that is at hand, news about Keely's inventions and news about the airship wave were treated by the contemporary press as two separate events; nowhere in those accounts did I find a reference to each other, either by way of explanation or otherwise.

Moreover, the 19th century airship wave was not the first time that inexplicable sightings occurred. As far back as the 1880s, UFOs were seen that were described as "electric balloons," it is also suggested that in 1892 a similar wave struck Poland.3 The American airship wave of 1896 had its precedents, but not on such a grand scale.

Various explanations have arisen, such as misidentifications of the planet Venus, hoaxes, the doings of secretive inventors and a massive wave of UFO activity. Undoubtedly, the airship wave consists of all of these components. It has also been pointed out that the 19th century climate helped, too; man dreamt of achieving flight, writers of fiction often used airships in their stories, and there are accounts of dozens of inventors, Keely amongst them, who were working on plans, schemes and designs of airships.

Daniel Caulkins, for instance, published his Aerial Navigation: The Best Method at his own expense in Toledo in 1895, a year before the airship wave started. In Caulkins' book is to be found, or so the author states, a "concise description of a new airship which the author believes will be the accepted plan for successful aerial navigation (including) an entirely new motor and new application of wings." Caulkins describes himself on the title page as "the discoverer of the circulation of the nerves and the inventor of the electro-magnetic circular power."

Many eyewitnesses saw strange aeroforms in the years and months leading up to the wave, but the consensus is that the airship wave started on the night of November 17, 1896, with a sighting of an object over Sacramento that was described as having the "shape of a balloon," and having a bright, white electrical arc light. The object was seen by hundreds of people. Human voices were distinctly heard coming from the object.

A few days after the remarkable incident, a letter to a newspaper recounted the astonishment and excitement that was felt: "This is truly an age of invention. These navigators of the ethereal regions must have had an experience far more interesting than that of Dr. Nansen in his search for the north pole."

Almost from the beginning, the general opinion was that an unknown inventor had solved the problem of aerial navigation. As a newspaper at that time wrote: "The opinion of the masses is...that some lucky inventor, having solved the mystery of aerial navigation, is, with his companions, testing his invention in secret, with no intent of allowing a curious public to view it until his rights are fully protected by letters patent."

William Jordon surely thought so. In a letter to a newspaper, he recounted an incident that allegedly had taken place in August, while he was out hunting in the Tamalpais mountain range. Chasing a deer, he stumbled upon a "circular brushpile about ten feet in height" in a region of the mountain that "was seldom visited even by hunters." There he discovered to his amazement a "perfect machine shop and an almost completed ship," on which six men worked. "I was sworn to secrecy and have kept it till this moment," Jordon wrote.

Perhaps this general view prompted a San Francisco attorney, George D. Collins—five days after an airship startled the residents of Sacramento—to come forward with a fantastic tale. Collins asserted that yes indeed, the airship existed, and that its inventor was his client. "I have known the affair for some time and I am acting as an attorney for the inventor. He is a very wealthy man, who has been studying the subject of flying machines for fifteen years, and who came here seven years ago from Maine in order to be able to perfect his ideas away from the eyes of other inventors. During the last five years he has spent at least $100,000 on his work. He has not yet secured his patent, but his application is now in Washington.  I saw the machine one night last week at the inventor's invitation. It is made of metal, is about 150 feet long, and is built to carry fifteen persons. There was no motive power as far as I could see; certainly not steam." According to Collins, the airship was built on "the aeroplane system" and was equipped with two "canvas wings eighteen feet wide and a rudder shaped like a bird's tail."

Collins also witnessed a test run of the device: "The inventor climbed into the machine and after he had been moving some of the mechanism for a moment I saw the thing begin to ascend from the earth, very gently. The wings flapped slowly as it rose and then a little faster as it began to move against the wind. The machine was under perfect control all the time. When it got to a height of about ninety feet the inventor shouted to me that he was going to make a series of circles and then descend. He immediately did so, beginning by making a circle about 100 yards in diameter, and gradually narrowing in till the machine got within thirty feet of the ground. It then fell straight down, very gracefully and touched the earth as lightly as a falling leaf."

This remark is similar to Bloomfield-Moore's descriptions of Keely's model- airship that also was able to rise or descend or remain stationary midway with a motion that was "as gentle as thistledown floating in the air." Collins, however, did not elaborate on the propulsion and from his statements alone it is impossible to ascertain if he was perhaps subconsciously referring to Keely's alleged antigravity experiment. The only thing Collins ever stated about the method of propulsion was that he believed that "as near as I can recollect the propelling power is compressed air,"8 in connection with which veteran UFO-researcher John Keel remarked that, "a few years previously," Keely built "a strange contraption which could bend bars of steel, and do other things considered impossible for ordinary machines of the period. Detractors claimed that the Keely engine really operated on compressed air."

Collins also confided that the unnamed inventor had "forsaken the ideas of Maxim and Langley entirely in building the machine, and has constructed it on an entirely new theory."10 A statement that is analog to that of theosophist Scott-Eliott when he published his opinion of Keely the same year concerning vril that "more nearly approached that which Keely in America is learning to handle than the electrical power used by Maxim."

Collins also stated that the airship was also able to "rise to any altitude desired, describe circles or take an abrupt angle,"11 remarkable flight-characteristics that once again bring to mind Bloomfield-Moore's description of Keely's experiment with a model airship.

The only problem that was left to the inventor to solve was the wave-like motion of the ship that made him seasick. But, Collins confidently concluded, "In another six days the trouble will be done away with, and it is then his intention to immediately give the people of San Francisco a chance to see his machine."

Collins intimated that none of the larger parts of the airship were made in California; instead they were manufactured in various parts of the East and shipped to Oroville and Stockton, where they were gradually assembled. Naturally I am forced to think of that intriguing mention of Keely having constructed a secret "device for lifting heavy weight's for a person in California."

When a reporter asked Collins how the inventor could hide an object of 150 feet long in a barn in the vicinity of Berkeley or Oroville, where it was guarded by "three men," Collins answered that the barn was "tacked on to an old dismantled two-story dwelling. The partitions have been knocked out, making the place practically one long room."13
Finally Collins provided some leads as to the identity of the inventor, and reporters soon thought they had discovered him in the person of one Elmer H. Benjamin. In the end, however, Benjamin turned out to be a dentist and not the airship inventor after all.

In the meantime, residents from Oroville did recall that "parties residing about three miles east of the town and in a thickly wooded section not traversed by roads, have been experimenting with different gases for some time past. One man, who is an expert chemist here, was heard to let slip a word or two about parties who were experimenting with a new and very light gas which would supersede the one now in use for balloons. It is impossible however, to get more than rumors, mere whispers, and it is impossible to say whether they are pure fabrications. It is asserted by more than one person that comparatively unknown parties with abundant means have been experimenting for some weeks with different gases, and that they were sanguine of having solved the problem of aerial navigation. The form of the airship they are supposed to have constructed is a matter of uncertainty. No one can say how the vessel is regulated or what means are used to govern its speed. It is rumored that such a vessel has been constructed near here by Eastern people, who desired to escape prying eyes and sought seclusion. It is evident that more than one man was engaged in the project, but it is impossible to learn any more of the names or give any details about the vessel itself."14 A rumor this may be, but as we will see, one that has a significant twist to it.

Another story is also significant because of one detail: George Carleton, a city electrician, singer and pioneer of Oakland told a reporter that he heard the name of the inventor through a friend of his. How did this come about? "I heard the story last night of a friend of mine who is also a member of my lodge of masons. It was he who talked with the man who saw the machine, and I was told the name of the inventor by my friend. As I understand it, the trip was made near Oroville. The inventor made an ascension of several hundred feet, flew off four or five miles, circled around a few times and landed as nicely as could be. This my friend's friend saw." But Carleton was not going to give any name. In a curious reference to freemasonic ritual, Carleton said: "I was pledged not to divulge them, and I'd saw my leg off first."

While Collins alleged that the mysterious airship was guarded by three men, which could very well be a reference to the freemasonic societies, we could further speculate that Collins meant that the airship was not so much guarded by three persons, but by an esoteric order, possibly modeled after a Masonic institution. While this is speculation, we have already seen the deep- rooted interest of several orders with avant-garde technology. Also, Carleton's Masonic friend could have had a conversation with Colville, who was also a freemason and who had visited California as early as 1886.
Throughout mis part of the airship wave, reporters would unsuccessfully try to hunt down the elusive inventor. All that Collins ever said about his identity was that he was "a resident of Oroville, and a man of wealth, about 47 years of age, and a fine looking fellow."16 And to add to the high strangeness of it all, Collins would change his story considerably. At first he claimed to have seen the ship itself, then he would suddenly state that, "I have not seen the new wonder. "17 In the end he would even say that he was "sorry to see that the newspapers have been attributing to me such an extensive knowledge relative to this airship. In truth I know very little about it.

...I know nothing of the airship. I do not know what it is made of, what power propels it, nor where its inventor now is. I am just as skeptical and incredulous regarding it as anybody can be."

What then was Frederick Bradley, an old friend of Collins, to make of what Collins had told him? According to Bradley, Collins confided to him that he had seen a "wonderful airship invented by a client of his." Collins also told Bradley that "a man whom he had never seen before had come into his office...and said that he desired to get a patent on an airship." When Collins pressed for details, the mysterious stranger invited him to take a look at his invention: "They went, taking the Oakland ferry and then the train. Collins told me just the place, that I do not like to state. They walked some distance after leaving the train and stopped finally at an old barn. It was locked, but Collins' client had the key." Inside the barn, Collins saw what he described as "a strange-looking affair made of white metal," which, he was told, was aluminum. Aside from the wings and the rudder, Collins also noted a "big light forward, like a searchlight," and some sort of cabin. Collins' reaction was also recorded for posterity: "Bradley must have been drinking to have imagined I told him all such rubbish."

Not that Collins' withdrawal mattered: A new person cropped up that would take his place. His name was William Henry Harrison Hart, former attorney general of the State of California. Hart met with Collins and talked with him about the discovery. At that time Hart emphatically stated that he had no doubt that the affair was "bona fide." "I have seen the thing in the air myself, and believe the idea of this Oroville inventor has proved to be practicable."

Hart, we learn, took Collins' place since the unknown inventor had decided that Collins talked too much. But what a poor choice Hart would prove! While admitting that he had not seen the airship himself, he made the sensational announcement that the airship was to be used in the service of the Cuban insurgents and he intimated that Havana was to be the first point of attack.

Reporters learned through other sources that the name of the alleged inventor was Catlin, and that he was assisted by Benjamin and George Applegate. Hart also confided that there were two airships, ".. .and they are very much alike. One was perfected in the East and the other in California. I have been concerned in the Eastern invention for some time personally." Hart stated that the aim was now to consolidate both interests. "I have seen the machine invented in the East and I am convinced that it will work all right, and from what I have been told I don't see any reason why the machine invented in California cannot be worked  The whole trouble in the problem of aerial navigation has been a question of motive power." But, according to Hart, the California invention had "the right motive power," which was generated through electric storage batteries.

But when Hart's statement is looked upon more closely, it only adds to the mystery, for it appears that he stated that the Eastern invention "will work." Did he mean then that he had seen a device that still "had to be perfected," as Keely had claimed a year earlier concerning his aerial propeller?

Hart stated that the machine, which was tested in California since the climate was of "favorable character," had one drawback: "that is that the inventor cannot cause it to stand still; it must be kept moving like an arrow. Otherwise it is under perfect control.

...It can be made to rise from a dead standstill. I cannot go into details about its construction, but will admit that it is of cylindrical shape, is built of aluminum and has wings."

Hart also explained that it was his interest in storage batteries that brought him and the Eastern inventor together. The only things Hart ever said about this Eastern inventor were that he worked in the vicinity of New Jersey, was a foreigner, "an Italian, I should judge, from his appearance,"22 a personal friend of the inventor of the Fargo storage battery,23 and in the end would even identify the mysterious inventor as being "a cousin of John Linn, the electrician of the Cuban patriot general, Antonio Maceo.  The inventor is not a Californian."2 and "a man of dark complexion, dark
eyed and about 5 feet 7 inches in height and weighed about 140 pounds."25 Nevertheless, the mysterious inventor has never been identified.

Hart did tell the reporter more about the two airships. "I will say to you frankly that I believe the Californian invention is better than the Eastern invention. The only trouble with the airship in New Jersey is that it will not stay in the air.


It moves through the air, but its course is towards the ground. The Californian inventor has a machine that will stay in the air. The appliance that keeps it in the air is a great parachute that opens automatically when the ship descends and closes automatically when the ship ascends.

...This hat shaped parachute keeps the ship in the air and makes the descent very gentle when the ship comes to the ground. It seems, however, to impart the ship with a wavering motion as it leaves the ground, upward bound. This is a defect to be remedied. This parachute is the principal advantage that the Californian invention has over the New Jersey invention. But the New Jersey man has so constructed his ship that should it drop into the sea it becomes a water boat. The Californian airship has not this advantage. The thing necessary to send up an
airship is sufficient power. Heretofore this power could not be obtained without overweighing the airship. Storage batteries were too heavy. Compressed air could not be used satisfactorily. Now light and powerful storage batteries can be obtained. That solves the problem. No gas is used. Gas would require a material used in construction that would expand. This is not a balloon. The material of which the airship is made is aluminum. The motive power is electricity in storage batteries."

Hart's allegations of the New Jersey device, meaning the Eastern invention, being able to be used as a seaworthy vessel is remarkably similar to Colville's statements on Keely's airship, which he wrote down two years before: Keely's proposed airship could "travel to other planets in this system as easily as the same ship could navigate the depths of the ocean."

Not only that, Hart's descriptions of the "wavering motion" and his emphasis on "light and powerful storage batteries" also have its parallels. For this we must turn to a passage in Astor's novel. "For flying" Astor fantasized, "we have an aeroplane that came in when we devised a suitable motor power. This is obtained from very light paper-cell batteries that combine some qualities of the primary and secondary type, since they must first be charged from a dynamo, after which they can supply full currents for one hundred hours—enough to take them around the globe—while partly consuming the elements in the cells. The power is applied through turbine screws, half of which are capable of propelling the flat deck in its inclined position at sufficient speed to prevent its falling. The moving parts have ball bearings and friction rollers, lubrication being secured automatically, when required, by a supply of Vaseline that melts if any part becomes hot. All the framing is of thin but very durable galvanized aluminum, which has superseded steel for every purpose in which weight is not an advantage, as in the permanent way on railways. The airships, whose length varies from fifty to five hundred feet, have rudders for giving a vertical or a horizontal motion, and several strengthening keels that prevent leeway when turning. They are entirely on the principle of birds, maintaining themselves mechanically, and differing thus from the unwieldy balloon. Starting as if on a circular railway, against the wind, they rise to a considerable height, and then, shutting off the batteries, coast down the aerial slope at a rate that sometimes touches five hundred miles an hour. When near the ground the helmsman directs the prow upward, and, again turning on full current, rushes up the slope at a speed that far exceeds the eagle's, each drop of two miles serving to take the machine twenty or thirty; though, if the pilot does not wish to soar, or if there is a fair wind at a given height, he can remain in that stratum of the atmosphere by moving horizontally. He can also maintain his elevation when moving very slowly, and though the headway be entirely stopped, the descent is gradual on account of the airplane's great spread, the batteries and motors being secured to the under side of the deck. The motors are so light that they develop two horsepower for every pound of their weight; while, to keep the frames thin, the necessary power is obtained by terrific speed of the moving parts, as though a steam engine, to avoid great pressure in its cylinders, had a long stroke and ran at great piston speed, which, however, is no disadvantage to the rotary motion of the electric motor, there being no reciprocating cranks, etc., that must be started and stopped at each revolution. To obviate the necessity of gearing to reduce the number of revolutions to those possible for a large screw, this member is made very small, and allowed to revolve three thousand times a minute, so that the requisite power is obtained with great simplicity of mechanism, which further decreases friction. The shafts, and even the wires connecting the batteries with the motors, are made large and hollow. Though the primary battery pure and simple, as the result of great recent advances in chemistry, seems to be again coming up, the best aeroplane batteries are still of the combination-storage type. These have been so perfected that eight ounces of battery yield one horsepower for six hours, so that two pounds of battery will supply a horsepower for twenty-four hours; a small fifty-horsepower aeroplane being therefore able to fly four days with a battery weight of but four hundred pounds."

Hart solemnly stated that it was he who advised the inventor to use his airship as a vessel of war, since he thought that "an airship might not be a very profitable vessel of communication for ordinary commercial purposes." Instead, Hart related to a reporter, the vessel should be used for military purposes. "I advised the inventor and he agreed with my views, that he could employ his invention in war. I assure you that I believe that by means of this airship a great city could be destroyed in forty-eight hours." Apparently Hart's idea was so well taken that Hart even declared: "You know the idea is not to get it patented, but to use it for war purposes."

If Collins talked too much and changed his statement in the end, Hart outdid Collins in both respects. During another interview he stated that the airship was "about 125 feet and of a width in proportion to his length." Also, the inventor was now planning an airship of 50 feet in length, "to be used for war purposes principally," since the 125 feet one was "too large" and "used up too much power in running against the wind—that is, it presents too much surface to the wind." The second airship would be constructed in the locality of Bolinas.29 The proposed attack would only cost the Cuban junta $10,000,000, and the United States would not become involved in the affair, since "the parties could go outside the jurisdiction on a chartered or purchased steamer and sign the contract and make all of the agreements necessary."

During another interview, Hart changed his description of the airship considerably. Now it did have the characteristics of a balloon: "The second ship will resemble the first.  The sustaining power is supplied from gas tanks, which are in the hull of the vessel and which are connected with the balloon which flies over the airship by a pipe. When the inventor wants to go up higher he lets more gas into the balloon out of the tanks, which are filled with condensed gas. When the inventor wants to fly lower he simply opens a valve in the balloon and the contrivance naturally descends, just as an ordinary balloon does."

Also, around this time Hart stopped making references to the Eastern invention. Instead he was wholly focused on the Californian airships, of which, we learn to our amazement, not one or two, but now three were in existence: "One. was of large size, capable of carrying three persons, the machinery, the fixtures and 1,000 pounds of additional weight, and another that was much smaller, capable of carrying one man, the machinery, fixtures and 500 or 600 pounds of other matter."

The inventor was also at work on the construction of a third airship "which is to be more commodious and more perfect than the other two." The airship was so constructed that if it fell in the water it could be used as a boat "by detaching a portion of the airship." The inventor had three assistants with him, all of whom were mechanics. Hart also told that the inventor used two kinds of power, gas and electricity. Sometimes gas or sometimes electricity would produce the light.

But, as history has decreed, Havana would not be bombed by an airship, and towards December, 1896 Hart too would sink in a sea of contradictions and ultimately disappear from the pages of history. Several authors have pondered over his strange role in the whole affair. It is suggested that Hart, who owned "the only mine in the world where osmium is found in metal form," was a hustler: the osmium of his mine was used in the manufacture of electric storage batteries, which, as Hart stressed on several occasions, were parts of the construction of the airship. It is suggested therefore that Hart was perhaps planning a scheme to enrich himself, although no evidence has surfaced that he ever did.33
Why Collins came forward in the first place is even more uncertain. The opinion of eminent UFO historian Jerome Clark in his recent excellent summary of the 1896 airship wave is that a century later, it has become impossible to judge what, if any, truth lay behind the claims of Collins and Hart. "Conceivably they were truthfully passing on what they had been told by clients who for their part were less than honest.  All that is clear...is that someone was lying." (Clark's italics)


But in order to understand that not all that Collins and Hart had said was nonsense, and to fully appreciate their statements, which quite possibly originated from Astor, we must look at the curious history of Charles August Dellschau and his encoded manuscripts, with which he left a legacy of continuing puzzlement.

Charles August Dellschau (1830-1923) will probably always remain a mystery, a shadowy figure for whom history has reserved no place. What we know of his life easily fits in a paragraph or two. Dellschau was born in Germany and emigrated to the United States in 1850. He then went to Galveston, Texas, but his own testimony places him in the mining towns of Sonora and Columbia, California, in the 1850s. It is not known what Dellschau did after these years, or where he went. We do know that he went to Houston, Texas, in 1886. There he married a widow and worked at the company that her family owned. In his latter years he would visit the company's store and would occupy himself by sweeping the floors. In 1908 he began with his manuscripts, homemade scrapbooks, eventually devoting all his time and becoming a furtive recluse. He spent his last years in a room, still working laboriously on his scrapbooks until he died in 1923.

In the end he would leave a dozen or more scrapbooks, each filled with numerous designs of airships, each drawing carefully laid out, and some drawn on a grid and watercolored. It is suggested that at one time Dellschau had help with these drawings, since some of them are drawn in a different hand than his. As aviation history expanded, he adorned every page of his scrapbooks with newsclippings, eventually leaving no room for his drawings with the exception of fanciful borders and patterns with which he decorated all the pages. During World War I, he filled some of his scrapbooks with war pictures from the newspapers.

Interspersed among all of the clippings and his drawings were notations and cryptic notes, which obviously carried a hidden message. It was from these notes that researcher P.G. Navarro was able to reconstruct the story that Dellschau apparently wanted to make known, but only after someone had deciphered the code. This code was written in symbols which were unique, although Navarro found superficial resemblances with the secret writings of several known secret societies. It seems that Dellschau was only reluctantly writing down his fantastic story, written down in a manner that would discourage all but the most determined researcher. Dellschau wrote: "You, Wonder Weaver, will unriddle these writings... which are my stock of open knowledge." What his writings yielded after their decipherment was the amazing story of the enigmatic Dellschau and his activities with the equally mysterious Sonora Aero Club, and those who were members of this most secret society with him. And while all this was fantastic, the riddle posed another mystery; for behind the secret Sonora Aero Club loomed another, even more secret powerful organization, known only as NYZMA.
From the interpretation of Dellschau's writings, he and a small group of associates gathered in Sonora, California, where they formed an "Aeroy Club" which they called "the Sonora Aero Club" in 1858 after becoming associated with the even more mysterious organization NYZMA. The Sonora Aero Club eventually grew to a membership consisting of some 62 members or associates, mostly German immigrants, Englishmen, some Spanish or Mexican members and one Frenchman. There are indications that they built their first airship in 1857 and that the motors were invented or made in 1856.  The Sonora Aero Club was dedicated to the designing and construction of navigable aircraft. The group worked in secrecy, and the rules of secrecy had to be strictly observed. "They were obviously members of a larger organization of which the Sonora Aero Club was but a small branch," Navarro writes. Members were not permitted to talk openly about their work or their airships, called "Aeros," nor were they permitted to use the aeros for profit making. Anyone who went against the dictates or rules of the society was summarily dealt with.

About the identity of NYZMA, Dellschau said little, if anything. The only allusions in many of his notations is that the Sonora Aero Club was under the direction of an organization called NYZMA, which was located "somewhere back East." Its unnamed superiors were overseeing and financing the activities of the Sonora Aero Club. The superiors were definitely not government authorities, for Dellschau, in his ambiguous way, states that a government official who somehow learned of their work once approached club members with the suggestion that they design and sell their aeros as weapons of war. The suggestion was turned down. The Sonora Aero Club was against war and dreaded the eventual conversion of their aircraft designs for war purposes, or, as Astor writes about his airships, "Having as their halo the enforcement of peace, they have in truth taken us a long step towards heaven."

The Sonora Aero Club designed and proposed a large number of aeros, including many ideas for motor designs, stabilizers and other gadgetry. But judging from Dellschau's drawings, it is difficult to believe that these machines were ever capable of flight. For instance, the bodies of the airships are radically out of proportion to the gas bag or balloon, which was supposed to lift the airship in the air. The gas that was used to lift the airships was no ordinary gas. According to Dellschau, the substance that they used was a fuel which, when injected into a chamber containing a drum-like device which soaked up the liquid fuel, produced a gas which Dellschau designates as "NB" gas. This gas not only provided the motive power for the airship, but also had the capacity to negate weight. "Incredible as it may seem," writes Navarro, "Dellschau was talking here about antigravity.  It does not say that it lifted the weight, but that it
'negated' or 'eliminated' weight." The NB gas was produced from a substance called "supe," and apparently only one man in the organization knew the complete formula for the manufacture of this important ingredient.

This man was Peter Mennis and he not only designed and built the first motor, but he probably also discovered the substance known as NB. The group seems not to have been a harmonious one; Mennis, for instance, did not share the formula of the gas with other members, and Dellschau's tale is riddled with strange and violent deaths of group members and sudden accidents. In fact, in some cases, the group members were even working against each other. Nevertheless, if we are to believe Dellschau's incredible tale, it was Peter Mennis who was the first person to successfully fly a navigable aircraft called the Aero Goosy.

This airship was a small craft with a basket-like affair in which the pilot was seated. At both ends of the basket were rigid chambers in which the power units were located. There the gas was produced and then directed into the two balloons on either side of the basket. In the center and attached to a pole was the air-pressure motor and the fuel container. Above this was an umbrella-like device, and once again we see a curious relation with Hart's descriptions, and at the bottom of the airship was a shock absorber which was called a "Falleasy." The airship had wheels to enable it to drive on the ground. Other drawings from Dellschau's scrapbooks suggest that the airship was also capable of sea travel.

Peter Mennis died during a fire accident. It is not clear if his death was foul play, but after his demise, the Sonora Aero Club was unable to produce the so-important NB gas. After his death the picture emerges that the group fell in disarray, although Dellschau is not too clear on this point. What happened to the mysterious NYZMA is also unknown. Dellschau's scrapbooks are not light-hearted reading, instead he paints a somber picture. The symbol of the crossbones and skull, which is also used by the freemasonic fraternity, is predominant in many of Dellschau's plates. There is also a vertical line of ciphers which contain the word "todt," which is the German word for death. Throughout the scrap-books, he often uses the symbol of the skull and crossbones and the reference to death.

Navarro's thorough research failed to uncover any evidence that there had ever existed a Sonora Aero Club in or around Sonora that was involved in the construction and flying of airships. He did find, though, that certain events which Dellschau described as having taken place in Sonora did actually happen, and although a local towns historian suggested to Navarro that if something might indeed have taken place in total secrecy, definite evidence until now has not been found.

But it is important at this point to remember rumors that are now a century old. At the time that Collins was making wild claims in the San Francisco press and Keely was busy trying to perfect his system for aerial navigation in Philadelphia, certain residents from Oroville alleged that somewhere in the vicinity of their town in a thickly wooded area where no one ever ventured, unnamed secretive parties were experimenting with a new kind of gas. While this rumor was started at least 40 years after the period in which the Sonora Aero Club allegedly operated, the similarities are striking and there is no exact date as to when the Sonora Aero Club—if it existed—fell in disarray.

Yet somebody in America carefully monitored the developments in California, this much we can distill from the few statements that Dellschau made concerning NYZMA. Perhaps that somebody was also instrumental in forging a cloak of secrecy that surrounded the device for lifting heavy weights that Keely allegedly made in 1881 for an unidentified gentleman in California.

Perhaps somebody was also carefully following Keely's progress in Philadelphia, for if there ever was a strictly secret organization involved in the overseeing of aeronautical endeavors, Keely's antigravity research, regularly published in newspapers across America, would certainly have drawn the attention of such an alleged group. This in turn might explain the sudden


withdrawal of Keely's antigravity instruments in 1898, coincidentally the year after the great airship wave stopped.
Also, Delisle Hay's cryptic 1881 novel Three Hundred Years Hence suddenly obtains a different dimension, especially the parts on the zodiacal force and of lucegen, the astonishingly lighter-than-air gas which alters its volume and thus its buoyancy when an electrical current is passed through it. And Hart's statements about "an invention in the East," or of the employment of gas and electricity, suddenly make more sense when seen against the backdrop of Keely's researches in Philadelphia, Dellschau's strange tale, and when compared to Delisle Hay's cryptic novel.

Dellschau never disclosed the identity of NYZMA, except that he vaguely stated that this parent organization was located in the East. In the latter part of 1848, R. Porter & Co., a firm which listed its address as Room 40 of the Sun Building in New York, distributed an advertising flyer in the Eastern parts of America. The flyer read in part that the company was making active progress in the construction of an "Aerial Transport" or an "aerial locomotive" that would take passengers between New York and California. The Aerial Transport would be put into operation on April 1, 1849, but as far as we know, no such thing happened in 1849.

Also living in New York was millionaire John Jacob Astor, inventor and acquaintance of both Keely and Tesla, who almost half a century later chose to use the term apergy which he borrowed from Greg's Across the Zodiac. It is inviting to speculate that Astor's literary borrowing was, on another level, meant as a subtle hint; that NYZMA perhaps means the New York Zodiacal Motor Association. We might envision behind that name an extremely wealthy and ultra-secret group that had mastered atmospheric and perhaps even space flight with exotic propulsion systems partially based on Keely's concepts, but this we do not know for sure. What we have seen, however, is that there is a large part of history that offers enough clues inviting us to theorize that in fact there always has been an exclusive underground that did possess certain advanced alternative technical means. Those means often surpassed conventional well-known technical achievements of the time-period or took a radical departure from known scientific doctrine.

What else are we, for instance, to make of an incident that occurred on Friday in April 1897, during the great 19th century airship wave? A Mr. Hopkins, described as an "elderly Christian Gentleman," encountered the airship when it landed in a valley in the vicinity of Springfield. "As the sun shone upon it the rays were reflected as from burnished aluminum. It rested upon four legs or supports, which raised it from the ground sufficiently to give room for two wheels like the propeller of a ship lying horizontally; one at the bow and one at the stern. Another at the stern lying perpendicularly was evidently for the purpose of propelling the vessel ahead, while the other two raised the vessel. The vessel itself was about twenty feet long and eight feet in diameter and the propellers about six feet in diameter."


Hopkins also had a chance to study the interior of the strange craft: "In the side was a small door. I looked in.  From the ceiling was suspended a curious ball, from which extended a strip of metal, which he struck to make it vibrate. Instantly the ball was illuminated with a soft, white light, which lit up the whole interior  At the stern was another large ball of metal, supported in a strong frame-work and connected to the shaft of the propeller. At the stern was a similar mechanism attached to each propeller and smaller balls attached to a point of metal that extended from each side of the vessel and from the prow. And connected to each ball was a thin strip of metal similar to the one attached to the lamp. He struck each one and when they vibrated the balls commenced to revolve with intense rapidity, and did not cease till he stopped them with a kind of brake. As they revolved intense lights, stronger than any arclight I ever saw, shone out from the points at the sides and at the prow, but they were of different colors. The one at the prow was an intense white light. On one side was green and the other red.  I pointed to the balls attached to the propellers. He gave each of the strips of metal a rap, those attached to the propeller under the vessel first. The balls began to revolve rapidly, and I felt the vessel begin to rise."

The remarkable description immediately conjures up images of Keely's vibratory system. Was this then a description of Keely's antigravity propulsion in all its grandiose completeness? This seemingly easy-to-find explanation only loses its easiness when we learn that the two human-looking occupants, a man and a woman, whom poor Hopkins encountered, were stark naked. They were able to communicate a bit through sign language though, and the male occupant pointed to the sky and made a noise that sounded to Hopkins like "Mars."

Was Hopkins referring to Greg's, Delisle Hay's, Cromie's or Astor's novels in a veiled sense? And how was it then that Hopkins, a devote Christian, would possibly describe two totally naked, golden-haired persons in connection with a highly advanced and sophisticated aerial craft?

A possible solution might be that Hopkins was hinting at something deeper while using a metaphor; for in Hopkins' letter he speaks of the two occupants as "Adam and Eve." We could dismiss this phrase as a typical 19th century expression of nakedness. We could interpret Hopkins words as a hint at Keely's inventions, which were animated by "the breath of God," the same breath that also gave life to Adam. It remains open to conjecture if Hopkins indeed was alluding to the beautiful innocence of Keely's vibratory science. While the naked man and woman are age-old alchemical symbols for the opposing forces, thirty-four years later and buried deep in the German occult substrata, the German Reichsarbeitsgemeinschaft which would take both Keely's and Bulwer-Lytton's concepts into the twentieth century, devoted a whole chapter in their second booklet with the title, "The World Apple. Why Were Adam and Eve Not Allowed to Break the Apple of the Tree of Knowledge?" Significantly, in this chapter the Berlin group made certain technical and physical conclusions concerning vril-en- ergy.

And what are we to make of an incident that occurred in Mitchell, South Dakota, years after the airship wave? Herbert V. DeMott claimed that in 1906, when he was 10 years old, he saw a "craft" land near a well. A door opened and the young DeMott was invited inside the object. There he was welcomed by two ordinary-looking men sitting on what looked like camp stools. During their conversation, the men refused to tell him where they came from, but they did tell him something about the propulsion system of their "airship." "The outer shell of the craft was filled with helium gas, and when the lever was moved the magnetism from the earth was cut off, allowing the craft to rise." As a strange allusion to Keely's early experiments involving water to be used to obtain his vaporic force, the men took water through a hose "to be used in making electricity."39 What is also disturbing, since this account stands not on its own, is that these more or less "normal" accounts are interspersed with even stranger encounters, of which plenty are found in UFO lore.

What we do know is that Astor was intimately connected to Keely, who used the same term to describe his force. Hart's puzzling statements of the airship going to Cuba obtains another dimension when we learn that Astor, who wrote about spaceships traveling through the solar system on apergy, was at one time a staff officer in Cuba to General Shafter in the Spanish-American War. Interestingly, Kinraide's researches in x-rays and his invention of the Kinraide coil also have a minor connection to the Spanish-American War: four ships involved in the conflict were outfitted with x-ray equipment, and a detailed summary of the U.S. Army's experience with x-rays in this war was eventually compiled, showing the importance of their use for medical ends. While Hart alleged that the airship inventor was of Cuban descent, we must not forget that New Yorker Louis Senarens too, who also profusely wrote of air and spaceships, was of Cuban descent. Also, Hart's stressing of the usage of electric storage batteries has been interpreted as a scheme of promoting the use of these batteries. However, it was Senarens who was the first person to propose that an air vessel be driven by electric engines powered by storage batteries. Under closer examination, Senarens' literary work suddenly yields a link to Keely.

It would also be easy to dismiss Dellschau's incredible tale as the ranting of an unstable mind, the idea of an exclusive underground with advanced technology as pure speculation, and Keely's inventions as a mere delusion, even when we take the strange whispered rumors of the Oroville community and the accomplishments of other free- energy inventors into account.

Since no positive evidence has surfaced that the Sonora Aero Club and the even more mysterious NYZMA did exist outside Dellschau's coded plates, others have suggested that Dellschau was indeed drawing solely from his imagination. And since only fragments of all those other incredible inventions are all that is left to us now, we are not in the position to draw any definite conclusion. But when we take all those similarities and possible metaphors into account, it very well could be that, through widening the scope of our research, we have by chance stumbled upon a very secretive underground of which we have for the first time uncovered its dim outlines.


It is alleged that Dellschau was a furtive man, as if in fear for his life. He also took take great pains to hide his messages in code. We therefore might as well scan all data for codes, metaphors, and hidden messages of which there are enough.

It is quite possible that Greg, Astor, Delisle Hay and Senares employed codings in their fanciful tales. This notion is not easily discarded; their writings have never before been the subject of such a search. In Astor's A Journey In Other Worlds, for instance, we find a company of the novel's heroes more than once seated at Delmonico's. Delmonico's was a restaurant that very much existed in the real world; Tesla used to dine there quite often. The names of the four protagonists each begin with a successive letter of the alphabet - a, b, c, and d.

In the titles of two of Senarens' tales that were influenced by Keely's inventive mind, we find at least a symbolic summary, a metaphor so to speak if we allow some poetic insight, and perhaps here we intuitively feel an expression of the growing hope and bitter disillusionment of the whole episode without precisely knowing what its sad contents are. We do feel, however, that in this highly complex episode there is enough symbology to somehow suggest that various and as yet unidentified opposing historical forces or fractions were at work. In one tale, published in 1897, the year that the airship wave struck large parts of the United States and reached its peak, Senarens named his spaceship "The Shooting Star." A year later, when the great wave stopped, Keely died and his antigravity devices disappeared from the pages of history. Senarens partially titled his tale involving yet another spaceship "The Sinking Star."

But there are other, spidery connections of a more tangible nature in this strange episode. Keely's alleged exposure was published for the first time in a New York newspaper that was owned by wealthy multimillionaire William Randolph Hearst. Hearst also played a significant role in the great airship wave, a role that has never been properly explained but that has been labeled by one author as "deliberate misdirection."

One of the newspapers that most heavily covered news about the airship was Hearst's San Francisco Examiner. Its tone was one of complete skepticism and even scathing sarcasm. But meanwhile across the continent, the New York Morning Journal took a completely opposite viewpoint and even went so far as to positively assert that the airship was a reality. Strangely, this newspaper was also owned by Hearst.

Who then was Hearst? Not only puissantly rich, he also desperately wanted to be the president of the United States, and he was the prime catalyst which sent America into the Spanish-American War. The prelude to that conflict was fanatically developed by Hearst in his newspapers side by side with news about the great airship. In this light, Hart's statements of the airship as a weapon for stamping out Spanish rule in Cuba, juxtaposed with Dellschau's assertion that the Sonora Aero Club dreaded the use of their airship designs as a possible weapon, obtains an unnerving meaning.
The question, asked by author Paris Flammonde, looms large: why was Hearst, an extremely wealthy publisher and financier with political ambitions and deeply involved in America's international and military affairs, directing his editors on each coast to present different and even contradictory news on the airship?

Adding to the strangeness is that while the scathing cynicism came from a newspaper that published news on the airship-sightings in the same locale as the events, assurances of authenticity came from a newspaper that was published on the other side of the country. "Hearst was a man of singular ability, a gambler for the highest stakes and a man of sweeping imagination. He did nothing without a very good reason. What did America's most aggressive newspaperman know about the great airship that he wished to have obscured?" muses Flammonde.40 And we might also add, what, if anything, could Hearst possibly have known about the nature of Keely's inventions that he so desperately wished to have obliterated from the pages of history?
