# 中性点的囚徒：基利的反重力实验 

8 Prisoners of the Neutral Point Keely's Antigravity Experiments

"For obvious reasons, those who possessed the secret of apergy had never dreamed of applying it in the manner I proposed."

Percy Greg, Across the Zodiac, 1880

"...and after my patents are taken out, I will devote the remainder of my life to aerial navigation, for I have the only true system to make it an entire success."

John Ernest Worrell Keely, 1884

"...thanks to apergy, the force whose existence the ancients suspected, but of which they knew so little, all things were possible."

John Jacob Astor, A Journey In Other Worlds, 1894


During the quarter of a century that Keely experimented with his unique devices, it is alleged that he accidentally discovered a means to disintegrate matter, and built several devices for an astonishing series of antigravity experiments. Scattered throughout the articles are a few obscure references that he not only discovered a method to disintegrate matter, but at one time was involved in actual experiments with disintegration and had even constructed a device to do so at will.

One story by theosophist R. Harte has it that Keely, with the help of a small machine, was able to disintegrate a reef of quartz: "...twelve 'solid men'—mil- lionaires—met by appointment in a laboratory in Philadelphia to witness an exhibition of the disintegration of quartz by a new method. They were mining magnates who had a tremendous interest in getting the gold out of quartz rock quickly and cheaply. The inventor obliged them by simply touching some blocks of quartz with a little machine he held in his hand, and as he touched each block it instantly crumbled into atomic dust. The specks of gold it contained stood out


like boulders in a bed of sand. Then the twelve men solidly said: 'Mr. Keely, if you will in the same manner disintegrate some quartz for us in its natural place, we will each give you a check for — dollars.' So off they all went to the Katskill [sic] mountains, and there the twelve solid men pointed out a reef of quartz on the side of the mountain, as solid as themselves; and Mr. Keely took out his little machine and said: 'Gentlemen, please take the time.' In eighteen minutes there was a tunnel in that quartz mountain eighteen feet long and four and a half feet in diameter.  All these men bound themselves to secrecy; and this is the first time that this incident has been made public. How was the quartz disintegrated? That is one of Keely's secrets."

It was not true that this was the first time that this incident appeared in print; almost a year before, a newspaper had already published the tale of the alleged mysterious meeting at the Catskill Mountains, of which we get none the wiser: "Let me add that recently, in the presence of several gentlemen interested in mining operations, Mr. Keely bored with his engine eighteen feet in eighteen minutes sheer into the quartz rock of the Katskill [sic] Mountains."

At one time, Keely allegedly also directed his disintegration research to experiments with dead tissue. Blavatsky assured her readers on two occasions that Keely somehow was able to disintegrate a "dead bullock" into a "heap of ashes" or even into "atoms,' in just "a few seconds."3 While she states this as a fact, at the same time her statements are of the shortest and vaguest kind; for instance, she does not tell when this particular experiment took place or how Keely achieved it. It is therefore impossible to establish whether Blavatsky's statements were based on hearsay, were meant as an embellishment of an already incredible career, or were based on accounts of an actual experiment.

According to Bloomfield-Moore, in 1878 Keely discovered his means to disintegrate matter while he was working on his vibratory lift: "while experimenting on the improvised multiplication by this medium, he had occasion to put a piece of marble, weighing twenty-six pounds, on a steel bar to hold it in place, when then and there his first discovery of the disintegration of mineral substance took place."

However, she dates the true genesis of this most unusual discovery as far back as 1875, when he was experimenting on his hydro-pneumatic-pulsating-vacuo engine, when, "accidentally, the first evolution of disintegration was made." Some confirmation as to the accidental nature of his discovery comes from Harte, although he gives a different version: "The disintegration of rock is, however, a very small and accidental effect of that tremendous force that lies behind the 'secret.' Indeed, that particular application of the force was a chance discovery. One day the inventor was studying the action of currents of ether playing over a floor upon which he had scattered fine sand,—the ether was rolling the sand into ropes,—when a block of granite, which was used for fastening back a door, disintegrated under his eyes. He took the hint, and in a few days he had made a 'vibratory disintegrator.'"

While Harte would want his readers to believe that Keely built his device in a few days, Keely himself stated that it took a much longer time: "I have been repeatedly urged to repeat my disintegration of quartz rock; but it has been utterly out of my power to do so. The mechanical device with which I conducted those experiments was destroyed at the time of the proceedings against me. Its graduation occupied over four years, after which it was operated successfully. It had been originally constructed as an instrument for overcoming gravity; a perfect, graduated scale of that device was accurately registered, a copy of which I kept; I have since built three successive disintegrators set up from that scale, but they did not operate. This peculiar feature remained a paradox to me until I solved the conditions governing the chords of multiple masses; when this problem ceased to be paradoxical in its character."

After these intriguing but slight references and Keely's admission that he was not able to reproduce the disintegration process, we hear no more of this line of research, even though Keely admitted that he had solved the underlying problem. Although an elaborate theoretical expose found its way into Bloomfield-Moore's book,8 Keely very probably never pursued this line of research any further, and his disintegration of "rock into impalpable powder" became quite legendary in 1894, and was by then remembered as a "wonder" that he had done in the past.

Likewise, his experiments with antigravity, then referred to as levitation, or "vibratory lift" or "vibratory push-process," as he called it, are shrouded in uncertainties. There is no indication of a specific date or year in which he started these experiments. A view of his early antigravity experiments (before 1890) can only be reconstructed with the greatest difficulty. If he took notes while experimenting, these are now lost. He built several devices with which to manipulate gravity, but although several of these sketchy descriptions have survived, it is not known how many antigravity devices he actually built. The only documentation that we have consists of inaccurate and superficial contemporary newspaper articles, several theosophical sources, a maze of entangled accounts—often gratuitously and distortingly copied by other writers—tantalizing hints and remembrances by people often trusted to paper as much as 10 years after the time period.

In addition, a suspicious cloak of vagueness and secrecy surrounds this area of his research. This vagueness and the dubious quality of the sources make a reconstruction of his antigravity experiments all the more difficult.

In 1878, Keely started experimenting with his system for vibratory lift, of which a method of disintegration branched. There is a slight but highly intriguing reference that three years later his system for vibratory lift may have led to a completed device of some sort. In October 1881, a reporter visited Keely's workshop, "at that time Keely had most of the lower apartment tightly boarded up, and the reporter, who thought an able mule or other source of mechanical power was concealed in the enclosure, tried in vain to induce Keely to open it. Keely said the enclosure contained a secret device that he invented for a California gentleman to lift heavy weights. Although this invention was said to be perfected at the time, there is reason to doubt the accuracy of Keely's statement, as no record exists unto this day (1885) of the application of the machine."

Even if this is a correct account we may probably never know what Keely was hiding from view, who the unnamed gentleman from California was or why he felt the need to keep this particular device secret. We could speculate that this "secret device to lift heavy weights" was in fact a completed and fully operational antigravity device. We could further conjecture that, since the device was "secret," of course no record of its use existed. As we will see in chapter 12, there are several reasons to attach more value to this slight but puzzling reference.

Whatever the true nature of this device that he carefully kept secret, in 1884 he obviously foresaw the ultimate possibilities that his experiments might yield: ".. .after my patents are taken out, I will devote the remainder of my life to aerial navigation, for I have the only true system to make it an entire success in the vibratory lift and the vibratory push-process."11 The term "push-process" evolved out of his philosophy concerning gravity: "As to the 'law of gravity,' it appears in the light of Keely's experiments, but one manifestation of a law of very much wider application—a law which provides for the reversion of the process of attraction in the shape of a process of repulsion."

But there, Keely's visionary mind did not stop; the force that propelled his engines was "the sympathetic attractive,—the force which, according to his theories, draws the planets together. While in his system of aerial navigation, should he live to perfect it, he will use a negation of this force,—the same that regulates the motion of the planets in their recession from each other."

In 1887, a newspaper mentioned that Keely "has been making a flying machine...," a description unfortunately so vague that nothing can be learned from it, although the article published "a part of his explanation of its principle": "This machine will be capable of making a sympathetic outreach of a distance great enough about itself to not only neutralize the effects of gravitation, but to permit the engine and its equipment, no matter how heavy or heavily burdened, to keep it."

More reports of his antigravity experiments before 1890 can be found in a small number of theosophical publications. Blavatsky, for instance, wondered what it was that "acts as the formidable generator of invisible but tremendous force, of that power which is not only capable of driving an engine of 25 horsepower, but has even been employed to lift the machinery bodily?" Although Blavatsky devotes several pages to Keely and his theories, on the point of his antigravity research, such as his disintegration of dead tissue, she unfortunately is not specific.

R. Harte, another theosophist, is specific though. We've already seen how Harte suitably forgot to mention that his account of Keely's disintegration was published before, and again he is vague to the point of total absence in citing sources or circumstances. In 1888, the same year that The Secret Doctrine was published, Harte referred to a demonstration: "One of Keely's scientific experiments is to put a small wire around an iron cylinder that weighs several hundred weight, and when the force runs through the wire, to lift the cylinder up on one finger and carry it as easily as if it were a piece of cork."

Five years later, the continuation of Harte's description found its way into Bloomfield-Moore's book about Keely, but without the graphic description about iron cylinders attaining the weight of "cork" or the mention of Harte as the source, even though she asserted that the demonstration was witnessed by Ricarde-Seaver. Ricarde- Seaver, who might also have been Harte's source, saw how "...Keely, by means of a belt and certain appliances which he wore upon his person, moved a 500 horsepower vibratory engine single-handed from one part of his shop to another. There was not a scratch on the floor, and astounded engineers declared that they could not have moved it without a derrick, which to bring into operation would have required the removal of the roof of the shop. Of course it is but a step in advance of this to construct a machine which, when polarized with a 'negative attraction,' will rise from the earth and move under the influence of an etheric current at the rate of 500 miles an hour, in any given direction. This is, in fact, Keely's airship."

According to Bloomfield-Moore, Keely also either built a scale model of his airship or used a model of an airship that was not of his design and conducted experiments with it: "In demonstrating what seems to be the overcoming of gravity for aerial navigation, Mr. Keely used a model of an airship, weighing about eight pounds, which when the differentiated wire of silver and platinum was attached to it, communicating with the sympathetic transmitter, rose, descended, or remained stationary midway, the motion as gentle as thistledown floating in the air."

Unfortunately she too, cites no source and no exact date, nor does she elaborate on the exact design of the airship model. As far as is known, no photo was ever taken of his model, or of what must have been a spectacular demonstration. From her statement it is not clear if she herself witnessed the demonstration, or if it was just hearsay. We are thus left dangling in mid-air, and only have her word for it that this demonstration actually took place as described. No newspaper referred to this experiment. Since this wonderful description was bound to stimulate the imagination, writers later copied this passage without mentioning Bloomfield-Moore as their source.

Around 1889, Keely was still lifting objects of immense weight. When the enormous metal sphere was found that signaled the coming exposure, Jefferson Thomas stated that Keely had used it for one of those experiments, "over ten years ago" before Thomas' statement was published by a Philadelphia newspaper in 1899. He gave a short description, analogous to Harte's account: "He attached a small wire to the sphere and connected the other end of the wire with his hat or the lapel of his coat, or some other article or apparel, on his person, where he always had a small vibratory apparatus. He would then, by this force, lift the 6,000 pound sphere."

While no description of this demonstration was published in the 1889 newspapers, 1890 would mark Keely's often-publicized experiments with the lifting of weights-in-jars that contained water, which, contrary to the demonstration with his model airship, were photographed. As far as is known, Keely would never repeat his demonstration with the small scale model of an airship, although Bloomfield-Moore considered his weights-in-jars demonstrations as a repetition of that particular experiment.

Perhaps the start of his weights-in-jars experiments in the spring of 189023 prompted Bloomfield-Moore to print a pamphlet in London the same year, suggestively entitled "Aerial Navigation," meant for distribution among shareholders in the United States. She had always been fascinated with the prospects of achieving flight. She knew early aviation pioneer Hiram Maxim, and Keely readily acknowledged that she helped steer the application of the results of his antigravity research towards a system of flight.

The pamphlet did not contain clarifications concerning Keely's antigravity research. It merely stated that "...he has now turned his attention to aerial navigation, for which the force he has discovered can be used without an engine." The remainder consisted of reprints of articles about Keely and the text of the contract between him and Bloomfield-Moore. Collier, however, refused to distribute the pamphlet amongst the stockholders.

Also in 1890, Professor Joseph Leidy witnessed Keely's experiment in raising a weight by striking a "sympathetic tone": "Dr. Leidy was asked this question: 'doctor, is it true that this unknown force has actually before your eyes overcome the force of gravity with which we are familiar?' And the answer, slowly, deliberately, was: 'I see no escape from that conclusion.'" Keely stated in plain language that he expected "to solve the problem of aerial navigation...for I can already move a weight up and down in the atmosphere, or even in vacuum  What is the force with which I do this? The
same sympathetic, attractive force that holds the planets together."

At the beginning of the demonstration, Keely attached one end of his platinum- silver wire to his transmitter. The other end was fastened in the metal cap that covered a glass jar. "  This was a glass jar such as chemists use, set on a heavy wooden table about five feet away from the transmitter. Upon examination, the jar proved to have a solid glass bottom. It was about 40 inches high and 10 inches in diameter. It was filled with what looked, smelled and tasted like Schuyikilli water. On the bottom of the jar, clearly visible through the water and resting directly on the glass, lay three iron disks, a two-pound, a one-pound and a half-pound weight, such as one sees in the scales of a grocery store. The weights were examined and weighed by several of those present, and were found to be what they purported to be."

Keely took "a bit of string out of his pocket," and wound it around the little brass spindle in front of the cylinder on the top of his transmitter, then "jerked the loose end and set the spindle whirring." Then he "sat down by the transmitter and began striking the strings of what looked like a harp in the cupboard-like base of the transmitter.
...While one hand was playing on the strings of this 'harp,' the other was moving tentatively about on the resonant rods on tops of the base of the transmitter, just beneath the cylinder where the spindle was whirring. Keely claimed that when the same note on both rods and harp strings was struck, the •force was at that instant...generated, or set in action...' All depended on the exact note, for perhaps there was a false note. The mass of weights at the bottom of the jar of water only quivered: one of them toppled off and fell to the bottom. Then all remained motionless."

He again sounded the "harp" in the cupboard and the resonant bars on top of it, explaining to Leidy that he was trying "to get the mass-chord of those weights. Every aggregation of molecules or of matter has a sympathetic chord, through the medium of which I can operate my vibratory force." The chord was not found for some minutes. Again the spindle was spun by the help of the twine and "its whiz was distinct in the silence of the room. The search for the mass-chord continued on the 'harp' and the resonant rods. A deep, clear note resounded from both at the same time, and at the instant it broke on the ear the weight that lay on the bottom of the jar by itself quivered and then slowly but steadily moved up through the water, as if impelled by some irresistible force, until it impinged on the top of the jar."

A year later in 1891, Keely once again confidently stated that, "I see no possibility of failure as I have demonstrated my theories are correct in every particular, as far as I have gone and if my depolarizer is perfect, I will be prepared to demonstrate the truth of disintegration, cerebral diagnosis, aerial suspension and dissociation, and to prove the celestial gravital link of sympathy as existing between the polar terrestrial and equation of mental disturbance of equilibrium. "

But the next years would not see Keely's depolarizer perfected, as the only experiment in this line that he conducted over the years was not disintegration, nor his far more interesting experiment with a scale model of his airship, but his experiment with the weights and the glass jars. In 1893, Jacob Bunn, vice president of the Illinois Watch Company, stated: "There can be no doubt...that Keely believes in himself and the wonderful examples he gave us of making heavy steel balls moving in the air at his pleasure by simply playing on a peculiar mouth organ."

A reporter witnessed such a demonstration in 1895, and remarked that, "The absence of acceleration in speed seemed to preclude the idea of magnetism, on the supposition that the disks at the top and the bottom attracted each other...Tesla's alternating current motor, run by one wire, did not seem to offer any explanation of the phenomenon."

But Keely explained that the disks were "sensitized," rendered "alternately attractive and repulsive by energy drawn from the ether of surrounding space by means under his control." He also used the terms "polar" and "depolar," with the attractive disks being polar and the repulsive ones being depolar. The platinum wire was connected to the device that would produce the force. He claimed that on two occasions, when an observer removed the disk from the top of the jar, the suspended weights "instantly fell, crashing through the bottom of the glass cylinder."

In 1896, Keely gave a demonstration of what he called his "polar-depolar force" or "the interchange of polar and depolar sympathy." The account relates how "copper globes were made to revolve in response to the notes of a tuning fork or a zither." The witnesses were given a look at his still-unfinished "new motor," only superficially described as "a great mass of steel." He claimed that the motor would "neutralize the force of gravity," so that "a child will be able to pick it up and hold it at arm's length." He also stated that with such a device, "no bigger than your hand," "a street car crowded to the roof" could be run.

It is at this point, and with all these experiments, that fact and legend have blended into a fantastic whole. When unraveled, the components show that some of the legend was based on facts, while we may probably never know if these facts led to the fulfillment of the legend. The publication of the weights-in-jars experiments, coupled with those slight references in the newspapers and the statements by Keely, Harte and Bloomfield-Moore, led to big expectations: For if small weights could be lifted, Keely said, "the suspension and propelling of an atmospheric navigator of any number of tons weight, can be successfully accomplished by thus exciting the molecular mass of the metal it is constructed of; and the vibratory neutral negative attraction evolved, will bring it into perfect control, commercially, by keeping it in sympathy with the earth's triune polar stream." He added confidently that "Gravity is nothing more than a concordant attractive sympathetic stream flowing towards the neutral center of the earth." Bloomfield-Moore painted her vista in plainer language, but delivered an even more inspiring outlook: "After he has gained as perfect control of it as we now have of steam, airships weighing thousands of tons can be raised to any height in our atmosphere, and the seemingly untraversable highways of the air opened to commerce."

While Bloomfield-Moore left something to the imagination, a year after the publication of her book Keely travelled even further with his visionary concepts. Thus he provided Colville with a fantastic outline of his ultimate plans. Colville's Dashed Against the Rock, published in 1894, a year after Bloomfield-Moore's book, provided the reader with every detail of what such an airship might look like, and where it ultimately might travel. Keely went far beyond Bloomfield-Moore's vista; in Dashed Against the Rock the skies were definitely not the limit. Colville's writings on this subject were a clear reproduction of Keely's visionary ideas and based on "authentic reports of interviews" with Keely.

"The vessel in contemplation, the aerial navigator," Keely confided to Colville, "will be over two hundred feet long, over sixty feet in diameter, tapering at both ends to a point, made of polished steel, and will be capable of being driven under the power of depolar repulsion at the rate of three hundred miles an hour. It can be far more easily controlled than any instrument now in use for any phase of transit. Another very remarkable feature connected with this system of aerial navigation is that the vessel is not buoyed up or floated in the air through the medium of the air, so that if there were no atmosphere it would float just as readily. Hence, under mechanical conditions most certainly capable of production involving massive strength of resistance to interstellar vacuity, this can be made capable of navigating even the remote depth of space, positioned between planets where polarity changes are being controlled by other adjuncts of concentration for that purpose. Safely enclosed within this structure, a man possessing the chemical knowledge that these new laws give, and with sufficient supply of material from which to make oxygen, could travel to other planets in this system of worlds as easily as the same ship could navigate the depths of the ocean."

According to Keely, all this would be accomplished by "A small instrument, having three gyroscopes as a principal part of its construction." This was used to "demonstrate the facts of aerial navigation."

These gyroscopes were "attached to a heavy, inert mass of metal, weighing about one ton. The other part of the apparatus consists of tubes, enclosed in as small a space as possible, being clustered in a circle." The tubes represented "certain chords, which were coincident to the streams of force acting upon the planet, focalizing and defocalizing upon its neutral center. The action upon the molecular structure of the mass lifted was based upon the fact that each molecule in the mass possessed a north and south pole,—more strictly speaking, a positive and negative pole,—situated through the center, formed by the three atoms which compose it. No matter which way the mass of metal is turned, the poles of the molecule point undeviatingly to the polar center of the earth, acting almost exactly as the dip needle when uninfluenced by extraneous conditions, electrical and otherwise. The rotation of the discs of the gyroscopes produces an action upon the molecules of the mass to be lifted, reversing their poles, causing repulsion from the earth in the same way as poles of a magnet repel each other. This repulsion can be diminished and increased accordingly as the mechanical conditions are operated. By operating the three discs, starting them at full speed, then touching two of them so as to bring them, according to the tone they represented by their rotation to a certain vibratory ratio, the weight then slowly sways from side to side, leaves the floor, rising several feet in the air, remaining in that position, and as the discs gradually decrease their speed of rotation the weight sinks to the floor, settling down as lightly as thistle-down."

Keely's assurances and prospects incited the imaginations of Bloomfield-Moore, Colville and undoubtedly everybody else who read their books. But while his assurances and prospects still had to be realized, other things were giving rise to the legend. There exists for instance a photograph, taken in December 1889, of what Keely called a Planetary System Engine. No information on this device is available, and considering his constant flow of avant-garde ideas as well as the name of the device, it is inviting to speculate that it was part of his airship, perhaps even constructed for travel through space. If so, this would be a unique feature in itself, for Keely would have been the only person who at that time had actually built an engine for space travel. There is a delightful but in every aspect equally unsubstantiated rumor that the planetary system was some sort of atrolabium; the device would demonstrate the laws and forces holding the solar system together.

Apart from allegations that Keely constructed a secret device to lift heavy weights for a man in California, he did construct a large and magnificent apparatus that he called the "aerial propeller."

The aerial propeller was meant to be an engine for an airship. There are no indications of the time period in which he was involved in the construction of his wonderful aerial propeller, but possibly around 1887 he started the construction of this device, since at that time a newspaper remarked that he "has been making a flying machine," which may have meant his aerial propeller. In 1894 Keely wrote to Bloomfield-Moore that "My strength has not reached the point whereby I can intensify myself to that degree requisite for the final sympathetic graduation on our aerial propeller, but I am rapidly reaching that most necessary condition, and am quite positive that by the first of June, I will be in perfect state to engage in this most fascinating work which I intend to push forward with my utmost vigor to completion."

But in 1895 Keely was still engaged in the construction of the aerial propeller and stated that he considered his device to be "not yet in working order."39 In 1897 Bloomfield-Moore wrote that "He still has to devise an instrument that will establish the connective link in the entire combination, whether in the terrestrial engine, or in the aerial propeller, before these machines can become obedient to the governing law of nature."

More is known, although not much, about this aerial propeller that was as mysterious as its inventor: "The flying machine and the apparatus for lifting heavy weights were in the back of the second story room  The flying machine however, had no moving parts, but was used as an awe inspirer, Keely's bloodcurdling accounts of its capabilities being accompanied by an occasional unexpected stroke of an ear splitting gong, which formed a part of its equipment."

The reporter who witnessed Keely's weights-in-jars demonstration, and who had looked with "considerable awe upon a machine filled with resonating tubes, which was said to be capable of lifting an immense weight by striking the proper chord," also studied Keely's aerial propeller. He looked with "some apprehension upon the engine built to navigate an airship, whose wheels were not made to revolve, but only to be set to certain combinations. It is not to be wondered at, therefore, when Mr. Keely struck the gong on one end of its shaft, which he said was the keynote of the machine, that the reporter shuddered at the thought that he might sail out into space on that machine without knowing its combination."

Other accounts provide us with more details of this incredible device: "Keely is at present engaged on a large and complicated piece of machinery which he calls the propeller of an airship, and whose purpose is sufficiently indicated by its name. It is supplied with three 'resonators,' or broad sheets of thin metal, each set to a particular pitch, and each playing some part in the mysterious process of drawing power from space. In addition are sundry disk-shaped and other apparatus, the whole arrangement being highly complex."

Perhaps the most elaborate description is the one that was given by Bloomfield- Moore: "Each disk of the polar and depolar groupings in the propeller of


the airship contains seven pints of hydrogen. In preparing these disks, the hydrogen is submitted to a triple order of vibration.  The space which the propeller of the airship occupies in Keely's laboratory comes within a radius of six feet square. A small space for so powerful a medium—distributing over one thousand horsepower, as tested by experiment."

According to her, "The aerial propeller consisted of more than two thousand parts, the most important of which were a positive graduating chladna that was guided by 'polar action toward the north and reversing by depolar action,' a sympathetic polar negative transmitter for operating and controlling 'the action of the machinery in producing polar and depolar power,' thus 'liberating the latent sympathetic power in twenty seven sensitized disks.'"

Other important parts were the polar and depolar intermittent accumulator that carried eight "focalizing disks" which received and distributed the sympathetic polar negative flow, a positive ring that was suspended on a small shaft with three points, meant to "preserve the integrity of the neutral center of the machine," and two resonating drums, one positive and one negative, multiplying the intensity of the sympathetic flow. Other parts of Keely's remarkable aerial propeller included 27 depolar triple groupings, nine in each grouping, consisting of three vitalized disks with resonators, replying "sympathetically to polar and depolar action," and a large polar ring that was "associated with the central resonators by nine resonating polar disks placed at equal distances." This, according to Bloomfield-Moore, was the medium for distributing the polar flow. The last part that she found important enough to describe, was a small negative ring, which was "the governor of the propeller, associated with a polar bar that oscillates from the polar field to the depolar field."

While this may serve as an example of language struggling to capture concepts of a most avant-garde nature, Bloomfield-Moore also left us with a description of the steering-device of the proposed airship: "The instrument devised by Mr. Keely for bringing the airship under control in its ascend and descent, consists of a row of bars, like the keys of a piano, representing the enharmonic and the diatonic conditions. These bars range from 0 to 100. At 50 Mr. Keely thinks the progress of the vessel ought to be about 500 miles an hour. At 100 gravity resumes its control. If pushed to that speed it would descend like a rifle-ball to the earth. There is no force known so safe to use as the polar flow. Mr. Keely thinks that when the conditions are once set up, they remain for ever, with the perpetual molecular action as the result, until the machinery wears out. In the event of meeting a cyclone, the course of the vessel, he teaches, can be guided so as to ascend above the cyclone by simply dampening a certain proportion of these vibratory bars. The instrument of guiding the ship has nothing to do with the propelling of it, which is a distinct feature of itself, acting by molecular bombardment; moving the molecules in the same order as in the suspension process, but transversely. After the molecular mass of the vessel is sensitized, or made concordant with the celestial and terrestrial streams, the control of it in all particulars is easy and simple. In ascending the positive force is used, or the celestial, as Keely has named it, and in descending the negative or terrestrial. Passing through a cyclone the airship would not be affected by it. The breaking up of cyclones will open a field for future research, if any way can be discovered for obtaining the chord of mass of the cyclone. To differentiate the chord of its thirds would destroy it."

Notwithstanding these descriptions, we will probably never know with any certainty what his whole system of aerial navigation consisted of, or what equipment it embraced. Keely also designed and built other devices to be used in his system of aerial navigation, such as his commercial engine of 1893-1896 that was never completed but was also intended for aerial navigation.

In the visionary fever of all these remarkable descriptions and slight references, it is easy to forget that we cannot actually say whether Keely actually built or completed a full-sized airship that was capable of flight, and whether his entire system of vibratory flight and his aerial propeller were ever used beyond the experimental stage. Contemporary sources are vague and ambiguous on this point. Although Bloomfield- Moore's writing may sound like a suggestion that something of an actual, full-sized airship might exist, she also admitted that, "Not until the aerial ship is in operation will the world be able to comprehend the nature of Keely's discoveries."47 In 1895, Keely declared that his system of aerial navigation still had to be "perfected and simplified before any patents can be taken out on the propeller of the airship."

A typed, unsigned contract in the possession of Bloomfield-Moore, dated September 24, 1895, but apparently signed by Keely "at the time John Jacob Astor and New York friends were talking of securing a large interest" in the Keely Motor Company, also demonstrates that Keely was still trying to perfect his antigravity device towards the end of that year: "It is my desire to give to the world the benefit of my discoveries at the earliest possible moment, without waiting to protect myself by patents beyond what is due to the Keely Motor Company shareholders and to my interests in aerial navigation, the system of which has to be perfected and simplified before any patents can be taken out on the propeller of the airship. In accordance with the wishes of my co-worker, H.O. Ward—without whose assistance this system would never have had birth, and who has lighted up as by a pillar of fire all my dark and intricate paths—I have proposed to instruct Mr. Zak Samuels in the taking up of dead lines and in the sensitizing of metal, so that it is acted upon by radiation on the same principle as in the human brain. As soon as I am ready to give this instruction I will notify Mr. Samuels (who is the only man I will have time to instruct) and this at the earliest possible moment."

Another confirmation comes from a theosophical source; in 1896, occultist W. Scott-Elliot while writing on Atlantis and its fabled vimanaas, digressed on Keely's proposed airship. The most important detail is that he too admitted that Keely still had not mastered his method of flight: "...the Atlantean methods of locomotion must be recognized as still more marvelous, for the airship or flying machine which Keely in America, and Maxim in this country are now attempting to produce, was then a realized fact."

Based on such sources, and the only ones available today in which we can trace his antigravity ideas, we find that as of 1897, Keely was still trying to perfect his aerial propeller and did not have his system of aerial navigation in working order.

We are left to speculate as to whether he ever succeeded in getting his system of aerial navigation in working order, or if perhaps others completed his work. Whether Keely's ship was witnessed in his time, glittering in the sunlight as it traversed the very skies, is now open to conjecture. We find no trace of it in the surviving sources directly relating to him. It is possible that he carefully kept results of this line of research secret, as he had done with the alleged device for the man in California. Coincidentally, 1896 would be the beginning of unusual sightings of strange and never identified aeroforms in the skies over large parts of America that lasted well into 1897. Their origins have always been as enigmatic as the inventor from Philadelphia.

Some months after his death, a magazine revived a passing memory of what was perhaps the greatest of Keely's ideas: "It should not be forgotten that Keely predicted that the flying-machine, for which the century has been waiting, would come to pass the moment his motor stood completed."

Nevertheless, it had been an original and innovative concept and such a legendary endeavor! And in time, legend it would become. Keely's antigravity experiments would be adorned with all the qualities and distortion that legends are made of. And so it became written, although suitably vague, that Keely "...successfully demonstrated a gravitational device to leading scientists of that time,"54 probably meaning but without saying so, Keely's weights-in-jars demonstrations as witnessed by Prof. Leidy and others.

Sometimes the facts would be mixed together into an entirely different story: "In November 1874 John Worrell Keely exhibited in Philadelphia a fuel-less motor without any apparent source of power, now believed to have been a novel, antigravity device; he was said to have been mysteriously silenced, his invention destroyed."

Recently it was written that he "demonstrated a free-energy flying platform to the bewildered representatives of the American War ministry in 1862...he could get out of his contraption free-energy propulsion..."

Notwithstanding the enthusiasm of these claimants, it needs to be pointed out here that this time period is adequately reconstructed in chapter 1, and that Keely at that time was still a year away from his work on an engine that he called a "reacting vibratory motor." As far as is known, he never demonstrated a free-energy flying platform to United States representatives.

The allegation that in 1896 he demonstrated an aerial craft on an open field to representatives of the United States War Department and several members of the press is relative to time periods more on the mark, but based on the documentation that is at hand, unfortunately equally unfounded and at best speculative.57 We have seen, based on contemporary sources, that Keely was still perfecting his system for aerial navigation in 1897, and 1896 would see no accounts in the press of such a demonstration, which, considering the state of affairs in the Keely history, would certainly have drawn headlines. Then again, the very same year would see the beginning of the great 19th century airship wave, during which thousands of Americans claimed to have seen those inexplicable aeroforms often equipped with bright lights. We will see in chapter 12 how this strange UFO wave is connected to Keely in a very subtle way.

What Keely did unknowingly accomplish was to become a forerunner and practical exponent of those who stood at the very base of antigravity research. While I have not discovered in the texts of these early theoreticists any proposition of applying or using their various principles for a system of flight—which sets Keely apart from this coterie—their search for a different approach of the phenomenon of gravity and the booklets that resulted from it form the theoretical foundations of what has become the quest for antigravity. This theoretical underground was a small, exclusive group that denied that gravity was a pulling force. It was in fact a pushing force, a quality that Keely had always maintained could be delivered from gravity.

Not much is known of this line of thought, except that its members were individuals. As far as I have been able to ascertain, they did not belong to any organized whole, although by naming them as a group might suggest otherwise. What they did was often refer to each other's writings, and by lack of huge amounts of like- minded studies to draw upon, sometimes traversed into the areas of fantastic literature where such concepts as antigravity or the manipulation of gravity was often used as a literary vehicle.

One of the first instances of the manifestation of this line of thought in printed form seems to be an obscure booklet published in 1905 in Holland called "The Push Force," by A.A.C. Belinfante. In it, Belinfante denies the theory of gravitation as we know it and substitutes this theory with the concept of "ether pressure from above."

"One may understand," writes Belinfante, "that the ether in the universe is no pulp, no fluid and no solid substance but the storage of all force." In Belinfante's theory, the ether-atom is "forty times smaller than the hydrogen-atom," a viewpoint remarkably similar to Keely's, and ether is to be found in abundance at the poles, since Belinfante considers gravity on the earth as "the pressure of ether on the earth, reduced with the pressure of the centrifugal force against the ether-pressure."61 And since the centrifugal force at the poles is "zero," it is there that the ether flows to: "Much ether penetrates the poles, which in the center of the globe is being intensified through the pressure of both the poles," Belinfante writes.

Possibly Bel infante's endeavor was fueled by news of Keely's antigravity experiments, as he formulated his unusual theories concerning the nature of gravity. While Belinfante fails to mention Keely in his text, information about Keely and his antigravity experiments certainly was available in the Dutch language from 1893 through theosophical sources. Belinfante writes that he began to declare his theory, verbally at first, in 1894 and subsequently in a small publication in 1897 which he sent to Dutch professors. Also, a Dutch translation of Bulwer-Lytton's The Coming Race appeared 20 years before. That strange tale of vril, the exotic source of tremendous power which propelled flying machines and wings, and which had a strange connection to Keely's work, we will treat in the subsequent chapter. In addition, occult initiate Rudolf Steiner, who was quite impressed by Bulwer-Lytton's novel, and who had much to say about Keely on several occasions, lectured in Holland in 1904.

What makes it likely that Belinfante might have read or learned of Keely's theories about gravity, possibly through Blavatsky's or Bloomfield-Moore's writings, is that Belinfante was a close friend of J.K. Rensburg, who was deeply immersed in occult doctrine. Rensburg was a brilliant writer with opposing leanings who pondered over the meaning of the Grail, wrote about the existence of god-like beings on other planets and about radio-contacts with Mars. He referred to Belinfante's booklet in the foreword to a collection of poetry about Atlantis published in 1923.

In connection with Belinfante's "Push Force" theory, Rensburg also mentioned Blavatsky's The Secret Doctrine, in which Rensburg, and through him possibly Belinfante, certainly learned of Keely. What makes this more plausible is that Rensburg, as he himself wrote, had "borrowed the idea of the existence of higher, superhuman beings" from Belinfante, an idea also present in both Blavatsky's and Bulwer-Lytton's writings. What Rensburg also wrote about was the booklet "There Is No Gravity" by Hans Goldzier, who penned it down under the nom-de-plume of "Th. Newest," clearly meant as a parody on Newton. Newest in turn referred to other booklets on the same subject, while supporting his theory.

But apart from the theoreticists of antigravity, there is another stratum, another strange trail through which we may add to our knowledge of what Keely was ultimately aiming at. Aside from being a forerunner and practical exponent of a philosophical current that searched for alternative theories concerning gravity, he also influenced several writers of imaginative fiction of his time, a strain that in some instances is easy to discern. It is likely that one of those writers, Percy Greg, was influenced by news of Keely's researches, and in turn influenced William Colville and possibly Keely.

At the time that Greg's book was published, Keely's antigravity research was in its early stage, and news of his experiments or futuristic extrapolations would still be some eight years away. But in the light of the incredible 19th century social potpourri with its unique fm de siecle flavor that Keely and the writers were living in, and in which science, literature and occultism often met and sometimes mingled in a diffuse whole, the connection to Keely is certainly there in the instance of the book Across the Zodiac, written by Percy Greg (1836-1889). The book was published in 1880 in a two- volume edition by the same London firm that coincidentally published Bloomfield-Moore's book about Keely 13 years later.

The story of Across the Zodiac is considered to be an important early interplanetary novel that also features an ideal society, and the book was destined to popularize the Mars theme in the early science fiction stories. Science fiction historian Sam Moskowits writes: "Never before had a space voyage ventured so far into the galaxy based on such sound scientific evidence.  The book's major status derives from its detailed, meticulous exposition of some important scientific theories and speculations of the day, and to its explanations of the scientific rationale behind these ideas."

Although it is stated that it is likely that Greg borrowed the concept of antigravity either from the 1863 book A Voyage to the Moon by Crystostum Trueman, or the 1827 book Voyage to the Moon by George Tucker, the very use of the word "apergy," together with the graphic descriptions of the space vessel, the method of its propulsion and a very detailed description of the steering apparatus in Greg's book, point towards a close connection between Greg and Keely's avant-garde ideas. Interestingly, science fiction historian E.F. Bleiler notes the influence of Bulwer-Lytton's The Coming Race on Greg's book.

Aside from uncovering the fact that a connection between Keely and Greg exists, it is impossible to establish the direction of the currents of influence with any exact degree. The trouble encountered while sorting out this genealogy of influences is with the usage of the term "apergy," a term that was applied for the first time in Greg's novel and which also became grafted on Keely's force.

Greg only vaguely writes that the word is derived from the Greek words "apo" and "ergos," that he translates as "work—as energy." He further states that, although there were those who possessed the "secret of apergy," they had never "dreamt of applying it in the manner I proposed," meaning, as a source of antigravity to be used for space travel. "It had seemed to them little more than a curious secret of nature," writes Greg, "perhaps hardly so much, since the existence of a repulsive force in the atomic sphere had long been suspected and of late certainly ascertained, and its preponderance is held to be the characteristic of the gaseous as distinguished from the liquid or solid state of matter. Until lately, no means of generating or collecting this force in large quantity had been found. The progress of electrical science had solved this difficulty; and when the secret was communicated to me, it possessed a value which had never before belonged to it."

This description brings Keely's procedures for the obtaining of vaporic substance to mind. Considering the time frame, Greg could certainly have read or heard about Keely's researches. Across the Zodiac contains 584 pages divided between two volumes, but the above passage is all that Greg chose to write about the force "apergy." Although Greg never refers to Keely, the passage could easily fit a description of his research.

From Greg's use of the very word "apergy" we also get none the wiser; while it is not readily discernible in Keely's jargon, and a letter to a newspaper about Keely's force stated that he "didn't call it 'apergy,'" we read elsewhere that he sometimes did call his etheric force apergy, although the only indications in contemporary sources lead us to assume that this happened no sooner than or around 1895. According to one newspaper account of a visit made to Keely on November 9 of that year, the "moving force" was referred to as "apergy."

The term also appeared in a letter by Bloomfield-Moore published in a newspaper in 1895.79 The term apergy became grafted on Keely's force and became associated with his discovery in more recent times.80 But Bloomfield-Moore's letter was written during the time that she and Keely were negotiating with her acquaintance Astor, and it was from Astor that she obtained the peculiar term. She wrote: "John Jacob Astor stands alone as having penetrated nature's secret, when he named the counterpart of gravity, or its dual force as the force to be used in aerial navigation. Mr. Keely once gave me permission to name it and I propose to take Astor's name 'apergy,' and immortalize him if Keely contends."

An article about Keely, also published in 1895 and titled "Apergy: Power Without Cost," again explaining the term as "the reverse counterpart of gravitation," also referred to Astor's A Journey In Other Worlds*2 - not surprisingly, since its writer had given Bloomfield-Moore the proof of his article that was originally titled "Keely's Discoveries." But, as she writes, "I have requested him to change (the title) to 'Apergy: Power Without Cost.'"

It might very well be that Astor in turn obtained the term by reading Across the Zodiac, since science fiction historian Moskowits states that Greg's book indeed was an influence on Astor as witnessed in his use of the term "apergy."

Greg's fictional Across the Zodiac conveniently begins in September 1874 with a visit to a spiritist seance in New York, just a month before Keely would give his historical demonstration in Philadelphia that led to the foundation of the Keely Motor Company. In Greg's tale, an Englishman received a coded manuscript found on an island somewhere in the Pacific. The manuscript was in a canister among the wreckage of an extraterrestrial object that struck the island with enormous force. The writer of the manuscript discovered the secret of apergy, here used as a repelling force that amounts to antigravity. He builds a space vessel called the "Astronaut" that is much like a ship. The space vessel has special features for maintaining life in space and chemicals for air supply: "On the further side of the machinery was a chamber for the decomposition of the carbonic acid, through which the air was driven by a fan. This fan itself was worked by a horizontal wheel with two projecting squares of antapergic metal, against each of which, as it reached a certain point, a very small stream of repulsive force was directed from the apergion, keeping the wheel in constant and rapid motion," plant life for purifying the air, a thick hull to protect the passengers against the extreme cold of space, etc.

The inventor then travels through the solar system with the help of the antigravity device that operates on apergy. On Mars, he meets its inhabitants, the "Martials,"as Greg calls them. These Martials have electrically powered, wheeled carriages that move along paved streets. There are black and white, and color photocopy machines, microfilm, telephones, plastics, conversion of waste to fertilizer, electrically driven balloons, boats propelled by a jet expulsion of water that are capable of submerging, telegraphs for communication, gas guns and a wealth of other technological inventions.86 At the heart of the novel lies a secret society; the inventor learns of the existence of this society variously called "The Children of the Star," "The Children of Light" and "The Order of the Silver Star," into which he is initiated during a stunning ceremony. Many of centuries of study have provided its members with telepathy and the means of killing by thought force if their secrets are divulged to the uninitiated. The book is riddled with esoteric and mystical philosophies.

Some passages from Across the Zodiac that describe the propulsion, the machinery and the steering method of the space-vessel are worth quoting, especially when compared to Bloomfield-Moore's and Colville's writings on the airship that Keely was contemplating: "I needed a repulsion which would act like gravitation through an indefinite distance and in a void - act upon a remote fulcrum, such as might be the Earth in a voyage to the Moon, or the Sun in a more distant journey. As soon, then, as the character of the apergic force was made known to me, its application to this purpose seized on my mind. Experiment had proved it possible.. .to generate and collect it in amounts practically unlimited.  But the vessel had to be steered as well as propelled; and in order to accomplish this it would be necessary to command the direction of apergy at pleasure. My means of doing this depended on two of the best established peculiarities of this strange force: its rectilinear direction and its conductibility. We found that it acts through air or in a vacuum in a single straight line, without deflection, and seemingly without diminution. Most solids, and especially metals, according to their electric condition, are more or less impervious to it - antapergic. Its power of penetration diminishes under a very obscure law, but so rapidly that no conceivable strength of current would affect an object protected by an intervening sheet half an inch in thickness. On the other hand, it prefers to all other lines the axis of a conductive bar, such as may be formed of (indecipherable) in an antapergic sheet. However such bar may be curved, bent, or divided, the current will fill and follow it, and pursue indefinitely, without divergence, diffusion, or loss, the direction in which it emerges."

"Therefore, by collecting the current from the generator in a vessel cased with antapergic material, and leaving no other aperture, its entire volume might be sent into a conductor. By cutting across this conductor, and causing the further part to rotate upon the nearer, I could divert the current through any required angle. Thus I could turn the repulsion upon the resistant body (sun or planet), and so propel the vessel in any direction I pleased. ... In the center of the vessel was the machinery, occupying altogether a space of about thirty feet by twenty. The larger portion of this area was, of course, taken up by the generator, above which was the receptacle of the apergy. From this descended right through the floor a conducting bar in an antapergic sheath, so divided that without separating it from the upper portion the lower might revolve in any direction through an angle of twenty minutes. This of course, was intended to direct the stream of the repulsive force against the Sun."

Greg also gives a very detailed description of the steering device of his ship, which, when compared with Colville's description of his "small instrument with the three gyroscopes,' again yields remarkable similarities in thought and concept: "My steering apparatus consisted of a table in which were three large circles. The mid-most and left hand of these were occupied by accurately polished plane mirrors. The central circle, or metacompass, was divided by three hundred and sixty five lines, radiating from the center to the circumference, marking as many different directions, each deviating by one degree of arc from the next. This mirror was to receive through the lens in the roof the image of the star towards which I was steering. While this remained stationary in the center all was well. When it moved along any one of the lines, the vessel was obviously deviating from her course in the opposite direction; and, to recover the right course, the repellent force must be caused to drive her in the direction in which the image had moved. To accomplish this, a helm was attached to the lower division of the main conductor, by which the latter could be made to move at will in any direction within the limit of its rotation. Controlling this helm was, in the open or steering circle on the right hand, a small knob to be moved exactly parallel to the deviation of the star in the mirror of the metacompass."

"The left-hand circle, or discometer, was divided by nineteen hundred and twenty concentric circles, equidistant from each other. The outermost, about twice as far from the center as from the external edge of the mirror, was exactly equal to the sun's circumference when presenting the largest disc he ever shows to an observer on Earth. Each inner circle corresponded to a diameter reduced by one second. By means of a vernier or eye-piece, the diameter of the Sun could be read off the discometer, and from his diameter my distance could be accurately calculated."

A year later, Greg's book was followed by another, equally strange novel, written by William Delisle Hay (?), titled Three Hundred Years Hence or a Voice From Posterity, that like Greg's novel, was published in London. Several of its themes also show a similarity to Greg's Across the Zodiac, and to Keely's concepts. But little is known of Hay other than that he once lived in New Zealand, and wrote two scholarly treatises on British fungi, and again, the personal details yield no clues as to any direct connection. Of Hay's book, opinions differ widely. The story may be looked upon as a ".. .solid prediction of the future, firmly based on the advance of technology..." making ' 'more changes to the state of the human race than practically any other work of the 19th century... " and as ".. .seriously intended prediction," but also as a "ruthless Spencerian survival of the fittest." This is not so strange, since the elements that are of interest here are imbedded in a story of terrible wars, overpopulation and its gruesome solution: a One World Order and the extermination of whole races.

A minor element in the story that serves as a roadmark towards the influence of Keely is Hay's description of a small, compact, easy and cheap-to-build device that requires no fuel. Called the "mechanical friction machine," it replaces coal for all domestic and industrial purposes.

A major element of influence is Hay's description of the discovery of a new force called ballisticity, or the Basilic Force, that links vitality and matter, permitting direct mental and organic control of light, heat, motion, electricity, magnetism, chemical affinity and attraction. While Hay's novel features huge submarines and diving suits, earth tubes and subterranean earth-borers, the tapping of the geothermal heat and the warming up of the poles and the founding of enormous subterranean cities, his descriptions of numerous types of airships and flying machines are its most interesting detail.

These airships are propelled by four distinctly different systems of motive power. One of these systems employs lucegen, an astonishingly lighter-than-air gas that alters its volume, and thus its buoyancy, by a factor of 10 when an electric current is passed through it. Canopies of balloons contain this extremely light gas; the canopy is positioned below instead of above the carriage: "The car was thus immersed, as it were, in a bladder covering it externally but leaving it open above; it sat in its balloon just as it might in water."

Hay foresaw that such a design might be unstable, so in order to prevent such a balloon from toppling over, powerful magnets are used that are attracted to the Earth's magnetic field. Stabilized, the "Lucegenostats" are able to carry large weights of freight or passengers. Yet these Lucegenostats are surpassed by even more powerful aerial machines, working on the three other systems. Their lift is being provided by basilicomagnetism for greater power and safety. The propellant comes from "generated heat and electricity," which causes a pair of fans, modeled on wings of birds, "extended along the sides of the craft from stern to stern" to flap. This type is known as the "alamotor," and is used for small, utilitarian crafts such as those used for agricultural purposes. The "spiralometer" is driven by one or more propellers of the "pusher" variety, normally placed at the stern. "Heat and electricity give the motive power, and this form is the most generally employed on aircraft," Hay writes.

The other airships, able to lift any weight, use a new and "utterly unsuspected force," which Hay names zodiacal force, clearly meant as a hint to Greg's Across the Zodiac. Hay describes the zodiacal force as "that which holds together the elements of the air." Driven by Zodiamotors, being powered by Zodiacal electricity, the airships travel a thousand miles an hour or faster, "though seldom employing more than half that rate."

In 1882, a year after Hay's futuristic visions and just a short distance from Philadelphia, a most remarkable book was privately printed. The title of the book was Oahspe, and it would in many respects prove as puzzling as the Philadelphian inventor. The history of its conception was as outre as its contents. Oahspe was "automatically" written in the course of one year by John Ballou Newbrough (1828-1891). He was not a lonely literator who was starving in a garret, instead he was no stranger to the occult communities of the time. Newbrough had traveled widely in Europe and the Orient, lecturing to spiritualist groups while "wearing brightly colored Oriental robes." His fame as a medium and automatic writer spread and, consequently, legends sprang up around him. He was said to be able to paint pictures in total darkness, using both hands in the process. It was said that he could close his eyes and read any book in any library. As with Keely, many claimed that Newbrough possessed some means to overcome gravity; he could easily lift weights of more than a ton. It was also claimed that his astral body was able to visit any place on earth.

Newbrough was active as a medium for two years in The Domain, a small spiritualist colony in Jamestown, New York. He also acquired the ability to write automatically in long-hand. All this occult activity would have its repercussions on him. One night in 1870, he was visited by what he described as wingless angels, bathing in a soft light. A voice told him that he was destined for a special mission. Ten years later he was again awakened by the mysterious light, and the voice commanded him to buy a typewriter. Angels, the voice assured him, would guide his fingers while he typed. These automatic typewriting sessions began in the early morning of January 1, 1881, and would last until December 15 of the same year.

After fifty weeks, in which Newbroughs' angels controlled his fingers for half an hour before sunrise, the controls finally stopped. He was told by the angels to read for the first time what he had written, and then to publish it as a book, entitled Oahspe. Newbrough printed the book himself in Boston in 1882 on a press bought with money from seven anonymous associates. No author's name was on the title page. A second, revised edition appeared in 1891, which was reprinted in London in 1910.

Oahspe features an elaborate and complex cosmogony, with thousands of millions of gods, huge spiritual realms and higher dimensions. In this vast hierarchy, there are also countless numbers of heavens, one of these called Etherea. All heavenly bodies, suns, planets, and moons arise from and are sustained by rotating vortices of space-time, so reminiscent of what Keely termed "the celestial forces."

Mutual influence or similarity between the two we will probably never know. Perhaps Oahspe was handed over by that other medium and Keely's friend, Colville. Newbrough's manuscript of Oahspe was destroyed in a flood, and his social life during the years that he visited spiritualist circles and traveled widely before he wrote Oahspe was never the subject of any in-depth study. What is interesting in connection to the intellectual framework in which Keely lived, conducted his antigravity experiments and formulated his theories concerning gravity, is that a similar train of thought can be discerned in Oahspe: "Things fall not to the earth because of the magnetism therein..
.but they are driven toward the center of the vortex, by the power of the vortex." And what Keely called the "sympathetic attractive, or the force that draws the planets together" and in another application would regulate the motions of the planets "in their recession from each other" is named by Newbrough "the force of the vortex" or "vortexya."

But Keely also admits that "All such experiments that I have made.. .resulted in vortex motion invariably, both sympathetically and otherwise. Vortex motion follows nature in all corpuscular action."
Newbrough also mentions ether, but calls it "ethe": "There are two known things in the universe: ethe and corpor." Oahspe further adds that "Attraction... existeth not in any corporeal substance as a separate thing. There is no substance of attraction. Nor is there any substance of gravitation. These powers are the manifestation of vortexya." And Newbrough, or his angelic guides, warns sternly that to withdraw the vortexian power would be catastrophic; "the earth would instantly go into dissolution." Keely gravely states that, "It is the sympathetic attractive force which keeps the planets subservient to a certain range of motion, between their oscillations. If this condition were broken up, the rotation of the planets would cease; if destroyed at a given point of recession, all planets would become wanderers, like the comets; if destroyed at another given point, assimilation would take place...meeting, would fuse into one mass."

Newbrough's universe in Oahspe is not a cold and lonely place, forever stretching itself blindly and meaninglessly out into the void; angels in nonmaterial Etherean ships inhabit the universe. One ship is almost as large as the earth. Some are propelled by vibrations of colors, others by musical vibrations, a concept that is also familiar in Keely's thoughts on aerial navigation.

But in this framework, this stratum of spiritualists wanting to escape the horror vacui of a void universe, of occultists, theosophists, early theoreticists of antigravity and writers of imaginative fiction, we find another minor connection between Newbrough and Keely. Beside the similarities in thought—although each expressed these in a unique, personal jargon—the geographic surroundings that Keely and Newbrough shared, and the obvious rubbing of shoulders that at one time or another could have occurred, the link is found in a spiritualistic magazine. This magazine was Banner of Light, one of the leading spiritualist publications of that time. Newbrough himself published the account of how he came to write Oahspe in a long letter in Banner of Light dated January 21, 1883.

Keely's friend William Colville who was a prolific writer and like Newbrough a spiritualist, also submitted his writings to this magazine. And like Colville, Newbrough was a lifelong freemason. When Newbrough died in 1891 of pneumonia, his associate was in Boston, overseeing the second printing of Oahspe. Newbrough died before the book left the press. His body was interred in a Masonic cemetery in Las Cruces.

In 1890, a year before Newbrough died, Robert Cromie's fictional A Plunge into Space was published. The second edition featured a foreword by Jules Verne, the only foreword that Verne ever wrote. In the book, Henry Barnett discovered how to control the ethereal force after 20 years of experimenting, "which permeates all material things, all immaterial space"113 and that combines electricity and gravity: "...I have discovered the origin and essence of that law which, before me, never man did ought but name, or, at best, did but chronicle its known effects—the law which makes that universe of worlds a grand well-ordered army instead of a helpless mob of mutually destroying forces; when I tell you that within this ragged room, there stands a man who—grant him but ten years of human life—could sway a star in its course, could hurl a planet from its path? Man, I have discovered the mightiest secret of creation.  have discovered the origin-of-force!"

The influence of Greg's Across the Zodiac on Cromie's novel has been noted.1But Cromie (1856-1907), a Northern Irish writer and journalist, possibly through his profession, also read about Keely's weights-in-jars experiments, which received widespread press coverage the same year that the book was published, and passages in The Secret Doctrine that was published two years before Cromie's novel, in which she mentions Keely's disintegration experiments. These accounts impressed Cromie to a considerable extent, and as a consequence we find his borrowing of these actual experiments in his fictional novel. Take, for instance, the scene in which an unfortunate native meets a horrible end: "The Indian took the metal bar  His hand closed on the bar and instantaneously his frame drew up rigid. For a second or two he stood stiff and deathlike, and no man spoke. Then before the eyes of the horror- stricken crowd, the man's body sank down into a shapeless mass of pulp." Apparently one of Barnett's devices "almost wholly destroyed the attraction of cohesion in the man's body."

Cromie's description of an antigravity experiment also bears an uncanny resemblance to Keely's weights-in-jars demonstrations: "The ball, a tiny sphere, was lying in a tube of glass. This tube stood in an upright position on a plate of that strange gray material.  Barnett laid the end of a thin wire on the gray substance. The
ball within the tube flew to its upper end and remained there, suspended, as it were, by a magnet. The experiments with the glass tube show that the law of gravitation may be diverted, directed, or destroyed."

In this, Barnett succeeds and a large, black and globular spaceship called the "Steel Globe" is secretly built in an inaccessible region in Alaska. "A spiral staircase wound round the interior circumference of the globe. This staircase, or rather sloping path, had one very curious feature. The handrail was duplicated, so that if by any superhuman means the enormous bulk could be turned upside down one could walk on the underside of the spiral...Across the center of the Steel Globe a commodious platform swung like a ship's lamp. On this a very large telescope was fixed. the
platform was literally packed with astronomical instruments. Strange registers, the graduated lines on which were so fine as to be almost invisible without the aid of a magnifying glass, were set into the woodwork of a solid table in the middle of the swinging deck. Strongly made iron tanks filled a considerable portion of the interior space... .These tanks contained compressed air. ...Innumerable windows pierced the whole circumference of the globe."

With the Steel Globe, Barnett and his friends travel to Mars where they find Utopia. The Martians travel around in luxurious airships, but also have other means of negating gravity at their disposal: The Martians "were instructed. in that strange exercise of what may be called—in default of a better name—animal electricism. This discovery enabled the Martians to regulate at will the attraction of gravity upon them so that they could move at any distance they wished from the ground.""9 Their discovery of a superior civilization prompts one of his friends to propose the erection of an "Inter-Planetary Communication Company Limited."

Of the direct influence of Keely on Bloomfield-Moore's acquaintance, writer, inventor, and wealthy stealthy John Jacob Astor it is not necessary to make educated guesses, to circumvent any social terrain, or to fathom any possible connections through obscure philosophies or esoteric pamphlets, for there is ample documentation that the two had met.

In 1894, in the year that Colville choose to publish Keely's intriguing accounts and rudimentary blueprints for a spaceship, Astor published his remarkable book A Journey In Other Worlds, after spending over two years writing it. Of this even the biographer of the Astor clan, while missing the connection to Keely, seemed impressed: "In 1894 he published a Jules Verne-type science fiction novel...in which he predicted future developments such as aeroplanes, television and space travel."121 Astor's novel with descriptions of an antigravity device working on apergy, a term that he had borrowed from Greg's book, was widely read and became a bestseller.122 Notwithstanding the success of his novel, Astor would never return to that specific literary genre.

In Greg's novel, Martian astronomers think of Jupiter as "not by any means so much less dense than the minor planets as his proportionally lesser weight would imply. They hold that his visible surface is that of an enormously deep atmosphere, within which lies, they suppose, a central ball, not merely hot but more than white hot, and probably, from its temperature, not yet possessing a solid crust." Perhaps a Martian writer thinks Jupiter's satellites hold life "since the satellites of Jupiter more resemble worlds than the planet itself, which may be regarded as a kind of secondary sun."

And while one of Cromie's protagonists wonders what the planet Jupiter is like,the reader finds the answer to that question in Astor's very peculiar novel, for there, not Mars - already subject of so many visits - but Jupiter is the ultimate aim. A Journey In Other Worlds has a striking opening: "Jupiter—the magnificent planet with a diameter of 86,500 miles, having 119 times the surface and 1,300 times the volume of the earth—lay beneath them." While the traveling to the other planets in our solar system is an unusual and unique feature of Astor's novel, the positions of the axes of the planets of our solar system clearly obsessed him, and the straightening of the axis of the earth is its most important theme. A company called "The Terrestrial Axis Straightening Company" is concerned with the straightening of the axis of the Earth. This is done in order "to combine the extreme heat of the summer with the intense cold of the winter and produce a uniform temperature for each degree of latitude the year round."

The newly discovered force of apergy is interestingly but only vaguely described as "a fluid," which brings Keely's vaporic substance into mind. Apergy is obtained "by simply blending negative and positive electricity with electricity of the third element or state." Antigravity is obtained by "charging a body sufficiently with this fluid, gravitation is mollified or partly reversed, and the earth repels the body with the same or greater power than that which it still attracts or attracted it, so that it may be suspended or caused to move away into space."

Astor states that the secret of apergy was already known by certain persons; while Greg simply states that these persons were "those who possessed the secret of apergy." Astor equally vague calls them "the ancients." Perhaps Astor referred to the same "ancients" about whom John Keely once said that, "The ancients were far better schooled in spiritual philosophy than are we of the present age. Their mythological records, in their symbolic meaning, prove this fact. They recognized this latent element as the very breath of the Almighty; the sympathetic outflow of the trinity of force, the triple spiritual essence of God himself. Their concepts of Deity were greater and truer than our own. From them we learn that when God said 'let there be light,' He liberated the latent celestial element that illuminates the world: that when He breathed into man the breath of life, He impregnated him with that latent soul-element that made him a living and moving being."

While Keely claimed that an airship "of any number of tons weight" could be suspended if it would be kept "in sympathy with the earth's triune polar stream" and Belinfante wrote that "ether is found in abundance at the poles," Astor hints that the qualities of apergy have something to do with the terrestrial axis. During work on the straightening of the axis, apergy became to be better understood: "I only regret...that when we began this work the most marvelous force yet discovered—apergy—was not sufficiently understood to be utilized, for it would have eased our labors to the point of almost eliminating them. But we have this consolation: it was in connection with our work that its applicability was discovered, so that had we and all others postponed our great undertaking on the pretext of waiting for a new force, apergy might have continued to lay dormant for centuries. With this force and everlasting spring before
us, what may we not achieve?"

In Astor's novel, water is pumped out of the Arctic Ocean and shifted to Antarctica. Thus they overweigh the southern hemisphere and change the Earth's center of gravity. "Blessed are they that shall inherit the earth. ...We are the instruments destined to bring about the accomplishment of that prophecy, for never in the history of the world has man reared so splendid a monument to his own genius as he will in straightening the axis of the planet. No one need henceforth be troubled by sudden change, and every man can have perpetually the climate he desires," Astor writes.

And although with apergy it is possible to "someday visit the planets," why do so, "since the axes of most of those (planets) we have considered are more inclined than ours, they would rather stay here." Nevertheless, a large cylindrical spaceship called "Callisto" is built. Traveling a million miles an hour, Jupiter and Saturn are visited. Many life-forms, such as the beautiful musical flowers of Jupiter, are encountered. Saturn is the abode of the spirits of the dead. The book is filled with remarkable predictions: solar and wind energy, advanced medicine with inoculations for all sorts of diseases, linear motor trains, wireless transmission of power, super-metals, electric automobiles, battery operated airplanes with screw propellers and weather control. Traffic policemen check automobile speeds with instant cameras and the rabbits of Australia are exterminated by an artificial disease.

The novel also clearly showed that its writer had not forgotten his idea of creating artificial rain, although they had been rejected by the U.S. Patent Office. Rejected as they might be, Astor now wrote that, "Rainmaking is another subject removed from the uncertainties, and has become an absolute science." Curiously, one finds a similar intellectual occupation in Cromie's novel: By means of a "powerful machine" the Martians are able to "electrically" disturb the atmosphere, thus creating rain conveniently only at night. "I hope, Mr. Bamett, you will bring one of these machines back with you when you are returning," a protagonist of Cromie's novel utters, "It is wanted badly in some places I know."

During his college years Astor took courses with astronomy professor Pickering, who mentioned that the seasons were due to the inclination of the earth's axis off of the ecliptic. If the earth was not tilted away from the sun, Pickering suggested, the planet would have a uniform, moderate climate. Thus, a part of Astor's obsession with the axes of the planets is explained in his novel. In the same year that he started to write his novel, Pickering proclaimed to have discovered "lakes in great numbers on Mars. The Canals."

Pickering also was a corresponding member of the Society for Psychical Research, and perhaps this is why that in a novel of futuristic technological extrapolations, one encounters such an out-of-place concept as Saturn being the place of the spirits of the dead with whom Astor's protagonists communicate. A few months after the publication of his novel, Astor presented a copy to Tesla. Tesla did not seem to care much for Astor's book, although he promised "to keep it, as an interesting and pleasant memento of our acquaintance."

Astor may have presented Keely with a copy, although this is not known, nor what Keely thought of Astor's novel, or any of the other tales that so aptly depicted his visionary ideas. Bloomfield-Moore read A Journey In Other Worlds as we have seen, although she made the strange remark that, "At present I do not know of any one who believes that Astor wrote the book, but I have convinced myself that he did write it and wish to do him the justice that he deserves."

There were also other reactions; a Keely antagonist wrongly suggested that Keely shrewdly drew a connection between Astor's A Journey In Other Worlds and his discovery: Astor wrote "a book of scientific fantasy, in which he does wonders with a newly discovered force operating directly the other way from gravity, and which he calls 'apergy.' Well, shortly after Astors visit to Philadelphia Mr. Keely made public mention—meant to be taken as serious mention, mind you,—of harnessing Mr. Astor's 'force.' Keely didn't call it 'apergy,' but it smelled just as sweet. And its use showed which way the wind blew—Astorway for the time being..."

Astor's book also drew the attention of the occult communities, but certain circles surrounding the Golden Dawn were not amused by his novel, a strange thing considering the rich polar tradition in the occult. A review of A Journey In Other Worlds was published in The Unknown World, a turn-of-the-century occult magazine that barely lasted two years and was full of articles about the cabbalah, Rosicrucianism, spiritism and other subjects that interested the coterie surrounding Arthur Edward Waite, its editor and Golden Dawn member. In it, the anonymous writer cynically remarked that "Of this story it may be said that le roi s 'amuse (their italics), and when a prince of finance unbends that would be a ponderous criticism which was needlessly serious. All this, notwithstanding, a scientific romance should have at least the complexion of possibility, and here it is distinctly wanting. The straightening of the terrestrial axis is a very large piece of absurdity, and the imaginative element throughout is somewhat forced and stilted. Moreover, it is not written in a readable style. A special faculty is requisite for the scientific romancer; it is possessed by Jules Verne; to a certain extent Mr. Maitland exhibited it once in By and By; there is a gleam of it in the first chapters of The Goddess of Atvatabar; it was plenary in Lord Lytton; it is quite wanting in Mr. Astor."

Another who allied his imagination with Keely's concepts was Louis Senarens (1865-1939). Senarens is characterized as "a Brooklynite of Cuban descent and an extremely prolific writer with an enormous amount of wordage." Senarens corresponded irregularly with the great French author Jules Verne, and an exchange of ideas for their stories took place. During his lifetime, Senarens was referred to as "the American Jules Verne," and a comparison of the work of both authors indicates the similarity. Senarens wrote stories of airships suspended in the air by helicopter blades, "helices," three years before Verne did so in his Clipper of the Clouds that was published in 1886. Even the illustrations were identical, with three of those in Senarens' story also used in Verne's Master of the World. Not only that, one of Senarens' 1897 stories was named Frank Reade Jr. and his Queen Clipper of the Clouds, written by "Noname," a fanciful pseudonym clearly derived from Verne's character Captain Nemo. In 1897, the year that a puzzling airship-wave struck large parts of America, Senarens also wrote his Across the Milky Way; or Frank Reade, Jr. 's Great Astronomical Trip With His Airship "The Shooting Star. " In it, an airtight spaceship is featured which is propelled by a rotascope and an attractomotor, a device that utilizes magnetic affinities among the heavenly bodies and establishes magnetic fixes on selected worlds. The return is possible by reversing the currents. By playing off such forces against the earth's gravity, the attractomotor enables space flight. Interestingly, an occultist is also aboard the spaceship, hoping to reach theosophical heavens. This detail in itself could well mean that the author was inspired by some theosophical writings or pamphlets about Keely. Perhaps he read Bloomfield-Moore's book with its reference to aerial navigation, which must have been most tempting. After all, a writer of such unusual tales would have feverishly sought for everything that would deliver him even more outre plots and ideas.

An unusual feature of Senarens' tale was that while in space, the explorers sometimes left the ship in diving suits and helmets. In his 1898 The Sinking Star; or Frank Reade, Jr. 's Trip Into Space With His New Airship ' 'Saturn,'' once again the rotascope and the attractomotor are featured. According to Moskowitz, Senares was "the first to propose that an air vessel be driven by electric engines powered by storage batteries."

Another story that was definitely influenced by Keely's inventions was also fitting for its irony. The story was titled "Edison's Conquest of Mars," written by Garett Putnam Serviss (1851-1929). Serviss was employed as a staff writer at the New York Sun, and as a journalist at the New York Journal, the newspaper that published the devastating Keely expose on January 29. Serviss' story, his first novel, was serialized in the New York Evening Journal where news about Keely was published as well, from January 12 until February 10, 1899, during the height of the Keely exposure. The story concerns the invasion of the earth by Martians, and was a rewrite of H.G. Wells War of the Worlds. In Serviss' version, the scientists team up under the leadership of Edison to build powerful weapons against the Martians. Ironically, Edison and not Keely is credited in the story for producing two remarkable inventions: the vibratory disintegrator and an electric repulsion antigravity device.

We can even trace a certain influence of ideas in the writings of Jules Verne (1828-1905); The Hunt for the Golden Meteor, which was published posthumously in 1908, features a scientist who invents a "neutral helicoidal ray" with gravitational powers,147 the use of the term "neutral" in connection to gravitational powers pointing towards Keely who used the same term in connection with the same force. Some years later, in 1914, a Frederick Robinson (?) published The War of the Worlds, A Tale of the Year 2000 A. D. in Chicago at his own expense. In it he describes how science has progressed enormously by the year 2000. Airplanes travel at three hundred miles an hour and moving sidewalks serve pedestrians in New York. The moon has been provided with oxygen and is colonized, and it is possible to travel to Mars using apergy,148 a theme that by now sounds all too familiar.

Three years later, the same city would deliver another strange novel with the obvious Keelyesque influence. The book was called The Wizard of the Island or the Vindication of Prof. Waldinger, and was written by a Frank Stover Winger (1865-?), a writer of whom absolutely nothing is known. His novel employs huge flying devices, and a vibrometer that enables the operator to control almost everything vibratory, from sound to light and gravity. The vibrometer works not on the concept of atomic energy which its inventor refuses to accept, but instead on regulating the flow of the ether. With this device a small plane called "the electron" is propelled that can fly a thousand miles an hour. Obviously Winger hinted that he knew what he was writing about; in a monograph on the physics
in Blavatsky's The Secret Doctrine published a few years before, it is stated that "Some men of science speak of electrons as 'centers of power' in the substance of the ether."

Then there is the bizarre novel written by Everard Jack Appleton, equally unknown because behind this nom-de-plume not one writer, but a syndicate and two writers hid.

The first wrote The Sound Machine that was published in 1906, in which a free- floating balloon with a device hooked up to it is described, "some sort of apparatus consisting of little boxes, levers and wires." With this device one is able to turn sound into energy - a strange concept that the writer undoubtedly borrowed from Blavatsky's The Secret Doctrine, where she treats Keely's vibratory force as something that is similar to the occult power of sound, and the force that in the ancient times was fixed "on a flying vessel, a balloon" and "reduced to ashes 100,000 men and elephants."153 The second wrote a tale of which the title alone already evokes memories of Keely: the tale was named Tom Swift and his Polar Ray Dinasphere, and was published as comparatively recently as 1965.

Long after most of these fantastic tales, which were what science fiction consisted of in the early days, Keely would even enter ufology in the famous contactee book Flying Saucers Have Landed by Desmond Leslie and George Adamski155 through the same medium that had informed innumerable others of his existence: Blavatsky's The Secret Doctrine. For Leslie was an Irish occultist156 and Adamski too had risen from the occult undercurrents. At one time and well before his career as a contactee, he had been a member of The Brotherhood of Tibet, a quasi-theosophical order. And as we will see, it was in the occult underground that Keely's discoveries became fully appreciated.